3 2 0 2

v o N 8 2

] h p - o a . s c i s y h p [

2 v 6 1 0 2 1 . 6 0 3 2 : v i X r a

Generated using the official AMS LATEX template v6.1 two-column layout. This work has been submitted for publication. This Work has not yet been peer-reviewed and is provided by the contributing Author(s) as a means to ensure timely dissemination of scholarly and technical work on a noncommercial basis. Copyright and all rights therein are maintained by the Author(s) or by other copyright owners. Copyright in this work may be transferred without further notice, and this version may no longer be accessible.

A Radar-Based Hail Climatology of Australia

Jordan P. Brook, a,b Joshua S. Soderholm,b Alain Protat,b Hamish McGowan,a Robert A. Warrenb a Atmospheric Observations Research Group, University of Queensland, QLD, Australia b Science and Innovation Group, Australian Bureau of Meteorology, Docklands, VIC, Australia

ABSTRACT: In Australia, hailstorms present considerable public safety and economic risks, where they are considered the most damaging natural hazard in terms of annual insured losses. Despite these impacts, the current climatological distribution of hailfall across the continent is still comparatively poorly understood. This study aims to supplement previous national hail climatologies, such as those based on environmental proxies or satellite radiometer data, with more direct radar-based hail observations. The heterogeneous and incomplete nature of the Australian radar network complicates this task and prompts the introduction of some novel methodological elements. We introduce an empirical correction technique to account for hail reflectivity biases at C-band, derived by comparing overlapping C- and S-band observations. Furthermore, we demonstrate how object-based hail swath analysis may be used to produce resolution-invariant hail frequencies, and describe an interpolation method used to create a spatially continuous hail climatology. The Maximum Estimated Size of Hail (MESH) parameter is then applied to a mixture of over fifty operational radars in the Australian radar archive, resulting in the first nationwide, radar-based hail climatology. The spatiotemporal distribution of hailstorms is examined, including their physical characteristics, seasonal and diurnal frequency, and regional variations of such properties across the continent.

1. Introduction

Hailstorms account for a substantial portion of financial impacts caused by natural hazards globally, resulting in greater than 10 billion USD in insured losses annually in the United States alone (Gunturi and Tippett 2017). In Aus- tralia, hail is typically considered the most costly natural hazard in terms of insured losses, exceeding the combined losses of both bushfires and floods (Schuster et al. 2006; McAneney et al. 2019). Several of the country’s most populous cities have experienced hailstorms that resulted in over 1 billion AUD in losses, including Melbourne in the south (Buckley et al. 2010; Allen 2012), Perth on the west coast (Buckley et al. 2010), and most frequently Bris- bane and Sydney on the east coast (Soderholm et al. 2019; Schuster et al. 2006). Financial losses also appear to be increasing alongside an expansion of the built environment (Changnon et al. 2009), and as of 2019 in Australia, seven of the ten most damaging events occurred in the past decade (adjusted for inflation, Eichner 2019). The significance of these financial impacts underscores the need to quantify the current level of hail hazard in the region.

Numerous studies have investigated the climatology of hailstorms in Australia using various data sources, includ- ing hail reports, hail proxies from weather models, and re- mote sensing observations from satellite radiometers and weather radars. First, studies based on the Bureau of Me- teorology’s Severe Storms Archive are limited by well- documented reporting biases for hail observations (Allen et al. 2015). Population biases are particularly prominent in Australia, which has the fifth lowest population density globally. These problems are compounded by the fact that

87% of the already limited population resides within 50 km of the coast, leaving vast areas (mostly in the country’s arid interior) effectively unobserved (Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021). Consequently, climatological studies based on hail reports are restricted to more populated re- gions such as eastern New South Wales (Schuster et al. 2005). Changes in reporting practices further diminish the practical value of this data set (Walsh et al. 2016), espe- cially for more recent years where the archive has been poorly maintained. The most comprehensive analysis of hail reports in Australia is provided by Allen and Allen (2016), offering valuable verification for the results that follow.

Perhaps the most common approach for estimating the climatological distribution of hail on regional scales in- volves identifying “hail-prone” environmental conditions from numerical weather prediction (NWP) models. In these studies, an environment is considered “hail-prone” based on a combination of favorable model indices, such as Convective Available Potential Energy (CAPE) or 0-6 km bulk vertical wind shear (see Raupach et al. 2023, and references therein). Such an approach is appealing from a climatological standpoint due to the spatiotemporal con- tinuity of the underlying model data, and has formed the basis of several global (e.g., Prein and Holland 2018) and Australian (e.g., Allen and Karoly 2014) hail and severe storm climatologies. While these studies have contributed valuable insights into the distribution of hail events world- wide, they must be interpreted with some caution. First, the exact formation of the “optimal” hail proxy varies con- siderably between studies and different climatic regions (Zhou et al. 2021), often resulting in an overestimation of the tropical hail frequency in Australia (Bednarczyk and

Corresponding author: Jordan Brook, j.brook@uq.edu.au

1

2

Sousounis 2012; Allen and Karoly 2014; Prein and Hol- land 2018). Recent research by Raupach et al. (2023) addresses these concerns in an Australian context by train- ing their proxy on Australian hail reports, and allowing their formulation to vary latitudinally, which more accu- rately characterized hail environments across the country. However, the accuracy of this approach is limited by the representativeness of the underlying hail report data set, which is affected by the aforementioned biases involving population density and reporting practices. Moreover, hail proxies are known to suffer from the “initiation problem”, whereby only a small fraction of hail-prone environments (often less than 10%, Taszarek et al. 2020) actually un- dergo convective initiation (Tippett et al. 2015). This issue ultimately leads to large uncertainties regarding the true cli- matological frequency of hailfall. In an Australian context, this problem spuriously highlights a spatial hail frequency maximum over the ocean on the east coast (e.g., Prein and Holland 2018). These oceanic overestimations likely stem from an absence of known convection trigger mechanisms for the region, such as sea-breeze or topographic inter- actions (Soderholm et al. 2017b). Raupach et al. (2023) demonstrated that incorporating a series of additional en- vironmental constraints could successfully reduce the false alarm rate for Australian hailstorms, improving the Crit- ical Success Index (CSI) to ∼0.3 when compared to hail reports.

Recent climatological studies also attempt to address the “initiation problem” by confirming convective initiation through passive spaceborne observations of deep convec- tion. While passive infrared imagers aboard geostationary satellites cannot detect hail directly (Murillo and Homeyer 2019), some studies have used these observations to iden- tify dynamical characteristics associated with hailstorms, such as above anvil cirrus plumes (Levizzani and Setvák 1996; Homeyer et al. 2017) or overshooting tops (OT, Schmetz et al. 1997; Bedka et al. 2010). OT detections have been combined with hail proxies to produce regional hail climatologies in numerous studies (e.g., Bedka et al. 2018; Punge et al. 2021), and although this methodology likely improves on those derived from hail proxies alone, significant uncertainty still remains when associating OT detections with hail at the surface. Bedka et al. (2018) found that only 28% of OT detections are spatiotemporally associated with hail reports in Australia (within 1 hour and 50 km), which is also considerably lower than 50% in Europe (Bedka 2011) and the United States (Dworak et al. 2012). Despite these uncertainties, the Bedka et al. (2018) hail climatology of Australia is a significant advancement in our understanding of hail in remote areas of the conti- nent, and serves as a valuable reference for this study.

One final class of satellite-based hail climatologies rel- evant for our investigation involves hail detections from passive microwave radiometers and precipitation (Ku/Ka band) radars aboard low-earth orbit satellites. Studies have

shown that simple brightness temperature (BT) thresholds at certain frequencies correctly subset hail-bearing storms in the US with 40% accuracy (Cecil 2009; Ferraro et al. 2015). This principle has been employed to generate sev- eral global hail climatologies (e.g., Cecil 2009; Cecil and Blankenship 2012; Ferraro et al. 2015). Subsequent re- search with spaceborne precipitation radars by Ni et al. (2017) revealed that similar to hail proxies, these passive microwave methods overestimate the amount of hail in tropical regions such as northern Australia due to regional variations in thunderstorm structure. These insights have been used to more accurately detect hail events (CSI ≈ 0.28 relative to ground-radar-based hail detections, Mroz et al. 2017), and updated global hail climatologies based on these improvements will also serve as important secondary vali- dation for our study (Mroz et al. 2017; Ni et al. 2017; Bang and Cecil 2019).

Indirect hail detection methods from hail proxies, geo- stationary satellites, or passive microwave radiometers each have distinct limitations, which ultimately contributes to uncertainty in their resulting climatologies. In light of these constraints, weather radars offer an appealing alter- native for climatological hail studies. These instruments provide spatiotemporally uniform, three-dimensional, di- rect measurements of hydrometeors, making them ideal for climatological studies, assuming sufficient archive length and spatial coverage (Saltikoff et al. 2019). When re- stricted to single-polarized radar data (as is the case in Australia), the Maximum Estimate Size of Hail (MESH, Witt et al. 1998) parameter emerges as perhaps the most thoroughly validated hail diagnostic. Although MESH is not a reliable predictor of hail sizes (Wilson et al. 2009; Or- tega 2018), it has been shown to usefully discriminate hail occurrence within thunderstorms (Cintineo et al. 2012; Or- tega 2018; Murillo and Homeyer 2019). MESH has also been used to generate numerous regional hail climatolo- gies in Europe (e.g., Kunz and Kugel 2015; Lukach et al. 2017) and the United States (Cintineo et al. 2012; Wendt and Jirak 2021). The latter were created using the US NEXRAD radar archive, which represents the “gold stan- dard” for radar networks from a climatological standpoint, consisting of over 160 identical radars operating over three decades. In contrast, the Australian radar network is highly diverse in terms of archive length, beamwidth, frequency, and receiver type (Soderholm et al. 2022), and covers only ∼30% of the country’s total land surface. To date, these factors have limited radar-based hail studies to simple diur- nal/seasonal analyses in 10 locations (Dowdy et al. 2020), or more detailed regional climatologies for 18 years in Bris- bane (Soderholm et al. 2017a) and eight years in Brisbane and Sydney (Warren et al. 2020).

In this study, our objective is to expand on previous work by creating a national hail climatology. To achieve this goal, we detail how we must address the unique chal- lenges posed by the Australian radar archive, including

normalizing differences in radar frequency and archive du- rations, and interpolating between large regions with no observations. These methodological elements are outlined in Sections 2 (methodology) and 3 (radar frequency cor- rection). We begin our analysis at a continental scale in Section 4, by generating Australia’s first national radar- based hail climatology. We then identify five regions of interest within the national climatology to investigate on a regional scale in Section 5, providing a more comprehen- sive analysis for each. Finally, we summarize our findings and suggest directions for future work in Section 6.

2. Methodology

a. Data Processing

The radar data used in this study are obtained from Level 1b of the Operational Radar Dataset in the Aus- tralian Unified Radar Archive (AURA, Soderholm et al. 2022). Our analysis encompasses all available data be- tween 2000–2022, and mandates that each radar must con- tain over five years of operational observations in order to be included. Certain radars have also been excluded due to data quality concerns, such as geographically remote radars that did not historically transmit volumetric data, radars with persistent beam blockages, and various airport radars that are unsuitable for meteorological applications. These restrictions narrow our analysis to 52 radars, as illus- trated in Fig. 1. Among the 52 radars examined, only eight are polarimetric1 and fourteen are S-bands (wavelengths ∼10 cm); both of which have important implications for our study, and merit separate discussions in Sections 2b and 3, respectively. The Level 1b dataset contains quality controlled radar data in polar coordinates, and due to the single-polarization limitations for most of the archive, the horizontally polarized equivalent radar reflectivity factor (𝑍, hereafter reflectivity) is used exclusively for hail de- tection. A filtering procedure is applied to remove ground clutter contamination (Gabella and Notarpietro 2002; Heis- termann et al. 2013), and radar reflectivity is calibrated using a ground clutter monitoring and spaceborne radar comparison technique (refer to Louf and Protat 2023, for additional details). The latter is particularly important for our purposes, as calibration errors are known to severely impact hail size estimates (e.g., Warren et al. 2020). Re- cent three-way calibration checks for the Australian archive (between ground-based, ship-based and spaceborne radars, Protat et al. 2022) have found that post-correction calibra- tion errors fall within ±0.5 dB, theoretically leading to acceptable MESH errors of less than 5% (Warren et al. 2020, their Appendix A.).

1The Bureau of Meteorology’s Radar and Observation Network Up- lift program dictates that all newly installed radars are polarimetric. At the time of writing, 16 of the 66 current operational radars are polari- metric, with this number expected to rise in years to come.

Special consideration must be given for data quality is- sues when using radar data for climatological studies, par- ticularly when the climatological variable in question may be strongly affected by weak nonmeteorological echoes, such as chaff, anomalous propagation and sidelobe con- tamination (e.g., Fabry et al. 2017). These effects are un- likely to impact our results, given the relative echo strength and the elevated nature of the observations used to de- rive MESH (>3 km altitude). A possible exception may arise when spurious high-altitude, high-reflectivity echoes are detected due to ground clutter from elevated topogra- phy, especially during atmospheric conditions conducive to anomalous propagation. We contend that these cases occur infrequently in the Australian network due to the absence of prominent topographic features (highest peaks ∼1500 m, Fig. 1), and direct the reader to the geomet- ric justification given in Section 3.5 of Nisi et al. (2018) for a highly mountainous region. As in previous studies (e.g., Cintineo et al. 2012), a manual quality control proce- dure was applied to all identified hailstorms in the archive, which eliminated 1342 individual hail detections deemed spurious by a trained observer. We have determined that these evidently erroneous radar returns (such as complete volume saturation of >100 dBZ reflectivity) are likely at- tributable to hardware or signal processing failures and predominantly occur in the earlier portions of the archive for older radars.

The final data processing consideration involves the amalgamation of overlapping reflectivity observations from individual radars. Previous studies have highlighted the importance of integrating information from multiple radars in order to fill gaps in radar scanning strategies and compensate for range dependencies (Stumpf et al. 2004; Ortega et al. 2006). However, recent research by Brook et al. (2022) showed that gridding methods used to merge data into mosaics can degrade data quality, primar- ily through over-smoothing in the case of weighted average methods (e.g., Langston et al. 2007). Nearest-neighbor and linear interpolation methods can also propagate ob- servational noise and introduce first-order discontinuities into the analysis (e.g., Lakshmanan et al. 2006). Single- polarized hail detection methods are highly dependent on the vertical distribution of reflectivity columns, the recon- struction of which is considerably degraded by both of the aforementioned gridding artifacts. Consequently, we have opted to regrid reflectivity observations using the varia- tional interpolation method outlined by Brook et al. (2022) for each radar separately in our study, with a grid spacing of 1 km horizontally and 500 m vertically. This approach allows for quality control of individual radars without re- moving or recalculating the resulting mosaic when erro- neous data from one radar is removed and ensures that isolated radars with no overlapping coverage are processed in the same manner as those that overlap. However, it also requires an additional post-processing step to merge the

3

4

Fig. 1: An illustration of the radar network used in this study. Contours demonstrate the spatial data coverage of the radar network (ranges 20–140 km), with C- and S-band radars in red and blue, respectively. The ocean within 140 km of the mainland, excluding islands other than Tasmania, is filled with blue, and background shading illustrates topography.

resulting hail detections for overlapping radars, which is detailed in Section 2b. We deemed the regridding process essential in order to capitalize on its superior characteriza- tion of deep convective plumes, despite the considerable computational resources required for applying the varia- tional approach to all hail events in the archive. These methodological improvements ensure that the gridded re- flectivities are closest to those at the native resolution of the radar, where the original MESH constants were defined (Witt et al. 1998).

b. Hail Identification

The Maximum Expected Size of Hail parameter (MESH, Witt et al. 1998) is used for hail detection in this study.

Although originally developed as an object-based, single- valued parameter, we adopt the common approach of cal- culating MESH on regular grids (e.g., Stumpf et al. 2004). This process begins with the calculation of the kinetic energy flux based on the semiempirical relationship first introduced by Waldvogel et al. (1978),

(cid:164)𝐸 = 5.0 × 10−6 · 100.084𝑍 , where 𝑍 is in logarithmic units (dBZ). The hail kinetic energy flux is subsequently integrated across height levels that are cold enough (< 0◦C) and possess reflectivities large enough (> 40 dBZ) to likely result from hail. Formally, these constraints are implemented through piecewise linear weighting functions for both conditions (𝑊 (𝑇) and 𝑊 (𝑍),

(1)

Study Wilson et al. (2009) Cintineo et al. (2012) Ortega (2018) Murillo and Homeyer (2019) Warren et al. (2020)

Hail Metric Hail reports ≥ 19 mm Hail reports ≥ 19 mm Hail reports ≥ 25.4 mm Hail reports ≥ 25.4 mm Insured hail damage

Threshold (mm) 28 29 30 29 32

Table 1: MESH thresholds used to identify severe/damaging hail in various studies. Refer to each study for further details on the MESH matching/thresholding procedure used therein.

respectively). The weighted, vertical integration of hail kinetic energy flux results in a parameter termed the severe hail index (SHI), which is formalized as follows,

SHI =

1 10

∫ 𝐻top

𝐻0

𝑊 (𝑍) · 𝑊 (𝑇) · (cid:164)𝐸 · 𝑑𝐻,

where 𝐻0 is the height of the 0◦C isotherm and 𝐻top is the echo-top height. Finally, Witt et al. (1998) established the MESH formulation by empirically fitting SHI values to the 75th percentile of 147 hail report sizes, yielding MESH = 2.54(SHI)0.5. Murillo and Homeyer (2019) recently refit the SHI–MESH relationship using more than 5000 hail reports; however, these updated constants are not used here due to the alternate radar processing methods used in that study2. MESH has proven to be an effective hail discriminator; however, the exact MESH threshold used to detect hail varies slightly in the literature. Threshold values were defined to optimally identify severe/damaging hail, and several relevant studies and their corresponding MESH thresholds are given in Table 1. Given the similarity among these five preceding studies and the aforementioned ∼5% MESH errors associated with radar calibration, we deem it appropriate to take the average across them, which, when rounded to the nearest millimeter, results in a threshold of 30 mm.

We address the discrete temporal sampling rate of weather radars by implementing an advection correction algorithm from the PySTEPS package (Pulkkinen et al. 2019). This method interpolates MESH values along storm tracks by shifting values at time 𝑡 forward and values at time 𝑡 + 1 backward, before linearly weighting the two fields ac- cording to their temporal proximity (Anagnostou and Kra- jewski 1999). Advection velocities are calculated across the domain by applying the Lucas–Kanade optical flow method to the MESH fields. The procedure is applied over contiguous time periods with valid hail detections (vol-

(2)

umes with ≥ 30 mm MESH), and temporal interpolation is performed at minute intervals. These time periods are calculated such that hail detections separated by less than or equal to 30 minutes are grouped together. This threshold was selected to accommodate earlier years of the archive that had 10 minute (rather than five minute) volume sam- pling times, ensuring hail streaks3 from a single storm are not artificially split in cases with missing volumes due to hardware or communication failures.

Our analysis then departs from conventional MESH studies by adopting an object-oriented approach, where individual hail streaks are created by contouring interpo- lated MESH grids at the 30-mm level. Each hail streak is defined by the 30-mm contour polygon, and an example hail swath composed of hail streaks from three overlapping radars is shown in Fig. 2a. We conservatively (relative to prior studies, e.g., Soderholm et al. 2017a; Warren et al. 2020; Cintineo et al. 2012) limit swaths to a radial range of 20–140 km in our analysis to mitigate an underestima- tion of the true hail frequency due the radar’s scanning geometry (cone of silence and beam broadening). This conservatism is justified for the Australian radar archive, given the varying beam widths (between 1–2◦, refer to Table C1) and the dual-PRF artifacts present beyond 140 km. A preliminary analysis of the range dependency of hail frequencies (not shown here) revealed that hail frequencies were relatively stable between our chosen range thresholds and no obvious underestimation was observed for radars with larger beam widths. We direct the reader to Bunkers and Smith (2013) for a more comprehensive discussion of these effects.

Hail streaks from individual radars are then merged by taking the geometric union of spatiotemporally overlap- ping polygons (refer to Figs. 2a and 2b), yielding spatially uniform, merged hail swaths. Merged hail streaks are as- signed a range of statistics, including their area, start and end times, and optical flow velocities. Most of these statis-

2Murillo and Homeyer (2019) used a multi-radar reflectivity mosaic, smoothed using weighted average interpolation (GridRad, Homeyer and Bowman 2017). MESH estimates are extremely sensitive to reflectivity biases (Warren et al. 2020), meaning the SHI–MESH relationship de- rived for smoothed reflectivities is not suitable for the high-resolution grids used here (Brook et al. 2022)

3We follow the terminology outlined in Changnon (1970) by referring to a hail streak as “an area of continuous hail with temporal coherence, which is considered an entity of hail generated within a thunderstorm”. A combination of spatiotemporally proximal hail streaks may then be subjectively grouped to form a hail swath for an event.

5

6

Fig. 2: An illustration of the methods used to calculate the spatially invariant hail climatology. (a) Hail swaths outlined by the 30-mm MESH contour for the Mt. Stapylton (green), Marburg (orange), and Gympie (blue) radars on the 16th of December 2010, (b) merged hail swaths for the same case study (red), and (c) merged hail swaths for the entire archive. (d) The number of days observed for each coverage region at 100 km grid spacing, (e) annual hail frequencies for each coverage region, and (f) cell-based hail frequencies for a uniform grid.

tics require an object-based approach, as they may not be

c. Frequency Normalisation

easily calculated from an accumulated, gridded field (Nisi

et al. 2018). The resulting merged hail archive (e.g., Fig.

2c), along with the associated object-based statistics, form

the basis of our national and regional hail climatologies.

The precise areal definition of hail streaks in our object- resolution-invariant based approach permits a novel, method for calculating yearly or monthly hail frequencies. In a traditional approach using temporally accumulated (e.g., daily) MESH grids, hail frequencies can be evalu- ated at the original grid resolution by counting the number

of times each pixel exceeds a mesh threshold (e.g., Cinti- neo et al. 2012). However, by chance, some isolated grid points may not experience a single hail storm throughout the archive duration, leading to the spurious claim that the true climatological frequency at that point is zero. One may attempt to account for the finite archive duration by applying various ad hoc smoothing techniques (e.g., Cin- tineo et al. 2012; Murillo et al. 2021), or calculating hail frequencies on a coarser spatial grid. Hail frequencies cal- culated using the latter approach (e.g., on a 10 km grid in Warren et al. 2020) yield higher values, as the number of hail detections within a 100 km2 area is predictably greater than the number at each individual grid point. This resolu- tion bias in hail frequencies prohibits reliable comparisons between studies with different grid sizes [e.g., Soderholm et al. (2017a) and Warren et al. (2020)], and confuses the true meaning of hail frequency estimates.

In this study, we define hail frequency as the number of times hail is expected at any single point within a grid box, per normalization period (e.g., yearly or monthly). We justify this choice as more intuitive to an observer, as it attempts to answer the common question: “How many times per year are you likely to observe hail?” This is distinct from: “How many times per year will it hail within 10 km from here?” This spatially invariant hail frequency is calculated by intersecting all hail streaks with a spatial region defined at any resolution. The cumulative area of all hail streaks within that region is then normalized by the area of the region (𝐴) and its radar coverage duration (𝑁, with quality controlled days removed). Formally, hail frequencies ( 𝑓ℎ) are defined for each region as follows,

𝑓ℎ =

365.25 𝑁

×

(cid:205)𝑛

𝑖=0 𝐴

𝐴𝑖

where 𝐴𝑖 is the area of the intersection between the ith of 𝑛 hail streaks and the analysis region. Note that for monthly frequency calculations, 365.25 is replaced by 365.25 / 12 = 30.4375, and 𝑁 and 𝐴𝑖 only count days and hail streaks that occur within that month4. This approach can also be applied to gridded hail climatologies by counting the num- ber of MESH grid values that surpass the threshold, before normalizing by the total number of grid points within the coarser climatology grid.

The irregular shape of overlapping radar coverage do- mains (see, for instance, Fig. 2a for three radars) further complicates the specification of hail frequencies in a regu- lar grid. In grid boxes with overlaps in coverage, it is diffi- cult to prescribe an 𝑁 value, as different regions within the grid box have been observed for different periods of time. This is especially true for larger grid boxes, such as the 100×100 km grids illustrated in Fig. 2d. The solution is to intersect the radar coverage geometries with the underlying

4Also note that “normalized months” (i.e., twelve months spaced evenly across the year) are used in favor of calendar months to account for the effects of varying month lengths.

(3)

climatology grid, producing irregular “coverage regions”, each with a unique coverage duration. Hail swaths are then intersected with the coverage regions (black lines in Figs. 2d-f), and an individual hail frequency is calculated for each coverage region according to Equation 3. The result of these region-based frequency calculations is illustrated in Fig. 2e. Finally, we aggregate all region-based fre- quencies within each grid cell by preferentially weighting those regions with larger areas, longer archive durations, and more overlapping radars (𝑅), as these factors all re- duce uncertainty in the underlying frequency estimates. Weighted averages are computed as follows,

(cid:205)𝑚

(cid:0) 𝑓ℎ, 𝑗 · 𝐴 𝑗 𝑁 𝑗 𝑅 𝑗 (cid:1) 𝐴 𝑗 𝑁 𝑗 𝑅 𝑗

𝑗=0

𝑓ℎ =

(cid:205)𝑚

𝑗=0 where subscripts denote values for the 𝑗 th of 𝑚 coverage regions within each grid cell. In this manner, we are able to produce resolution-invariant gridded hail frequencies.

d. Variational Interpolation

The Australian radar network covers roughly 30% of the country’s land surface, the distribution of which is illus- trated in Fig. 1. As a result, some form of interpolation is required to create a continuous hail climatology through- out the country. This interpolation problem is particularly challenging due to large data voids, local variability in hail frequencies, and data noise introduced by the finite sam- pling period of the archive. Variational inverse methods are well suited to such a problem, as certain “prior knowl- edge” may be formally introduced to regularize an initially ill-posed system (e.g., Barth et al. 2014). Here, we seek to establish the following assumptions to help constrain the problem at hand:

1. Radar-derived hail frequencies are a noisy but repre- sentative sample of the true climatological values.

2. The true climatological hail

frequency varies smoothly in space and time at our chosen resolution.

3. No local extrema lie within data voids, and gaps are sufficiently constrained by the surrounding data.

4. Hail frequencies reduce to zero at some distance from the coast.

We will briefly discuss the reasoning behind each of these assumptions before outlining their mathematical im- plementation. First, we justify the representativeness of our frequency estimates in Assumption 1 by noting the rel- ative length of our archive (average ∼17 years, Appendix B) compared with seminal radar-based climatologies [e.g., four years in Cintineo et al. (2012) and eight years in War- ren et al. (2020)]. We choose suitably sparse grid spac- ing to satisfy assumption 2 (100 km), which theoretically

7

(4)

8

dampens high frequencies in the input data through spatial averaging and permits the use of smoothing constraints to “spread” valid information into data voids. Prior studies of the hail climatology in Australia (eg Allen and Allen 2016; Bedka et al. 2018; Prein and Holland 2018), provide justification for assumptions 3 and 4, where hail hotspots are not expected outside the current radar coverage or sig- nificantly out to sea. The extent to which the available data constrains the analysis within data voids will be investi- gated more thoroughly below.

We choose to perform the interpolation iteratively at two spatial scales: first at 200 km resolution to produce a provisional field, then at the final 100 km resolution using the former as a background field (𝜑𝑏). This type of nested analysis is common in variational problems (e.g., Laroche and Zawadzki 1994; Dahl et al. 2019), and is useful in our case as valid data spreads more readily at a coarser resolution, providing a useful background for the final analysis. The cost function used in both cases is as follows,

min 𝜑

(cid:8)|| 𝑓ℎ − R𝜑||2

2 + 𝐽𝑠 (𝜑) + 𝐽𝑑 (𝜑) + 𝐽𝑏 (𝜑, 𝜑𝑏)(cid:9) ,

where 𝜑 is the interpolated hail frequency field, R is a re- striction operator that samples the analysis field at data lo- cations and the standard ℓ2 norm notation is used through- 𝑥2 out the text ||𝑥||2 𝑖 . The second term in the cost function is a second-order smoothing constraint, imple- mented as,

2 = (cid:205)𝑁 𝑖=1

𝐽𝑠 (𝜑) = 𝜆ℎ

(cid:16)

||𝜑𝑦𝑦 ||2

2 + ||𝜑𝑥 𝑥 ||2 2

(cid:17)

,

where 𝜆ℎ is a weighting constant and double subscripts 𝜕2 𝜑 denote second-order partial derivatives, e.g., 𝜑𝑥 𝑥 = 𝜕𝑥2 . Second-order smoothing constraints lead to a visually pleasing minimum curvature solution, and the 3-point, cen- tered, finite difference stencil helps spread valid data into data voids (Briggs 1974; Shapiro et al. 2009).

Although 𝐽𝑠 may partially remove speckle noise from the frequency data, Brook et al. (2022) found that this con- straint alone is unsuitable for denoising due to unwanted by-products produced when heavily weighting this con- straint (oversmoothing and extraneous inflections in data voids, Shapiro et al. 2010; Brook et al. 2022). Comple- mentary inclusion of an additional anisotropic total vari- ation denoising constraint (Rudin et al. 1992) was found to adequately denoise the data, while damping extraneous inflections within the data voids and retaining high am- plitude peaks within the analysis fields (refer to Appendix B in Brook et al. 2022). The denoising constraint is as follows,

𝐽𝑑 (𝜑) = 𝜆𝑑 (cid:0)||𝜑𝑦 ||1 + ||𝜑𝑥 ||1

(cid:1)

(5)

(6)

(7)

where 𝜆𝑑 is a weighting constant, subscripts indicate first- 𝜕𝜑 𝜕𝑥 ), and the ℓ1 norm order partial derivatives (e.g., 𝜑𝑥 = notation denotes ||𝑥||1 = (cid:205)𝑁 𝑖=1 |𝑥𝑖 |. Forward difference derivatives are used by convention (Rudin et al. 1992).

Finally, the background penalty helps constrain regions outside the data coverage by penalizing deviations from an imposed background field (𝜑𝑏). At the provisional resolu- tion (200 km), the background field is uniformly zero and only applies to grid points over the ocean through the appli- cation of a weighting matrix that increases exponentially from 0 over land to 1 out to sea (𝑊𝑏 = exp(cid:8)−𝑟 2/𝑑2(cid:9)) where 𝑑 is the distance from the coast and 𝑟 = 400 km controls the rate of weight increase). At the final resolution, the provisional retrieval is used as the background field, and 𝑊𝑏 is then set to 1 for grid points over land with no valid data. Formally, the background constraint is implemented as,

𝐽𝑏 (𝜑, 𝜑𝑏) = 𝜆𝑏 ||𝑊𝑏 (𝜑 − 𝜑𝑏)||2 2

(8) where 𝜆𝑏 is once again a weighting constant. This con- straint serves a dual purpose: it constraints the analysis to zero around the borders of the domain to prevent any extraneous inflections or boundary effects, and assists in filling large data voids with values from the provisional analysis, permitting the use of less aggressive smoothing constraints to prevent oversmoothing.

The aforementioned data voids may lead some readers to question the extent to which the surrounding data actually constrains the interpolated values within. In an attempt to satisfy these concerns and justify assumption 3, we ap- ply the “clever poor man’s error” technique, which is an efficient method for assessing data coverage in variational interpolation problems (Troupin et al. 2012; Beckers et al. 2014). The procedure takes place as follows: set all avail- able data to unit values, reduce the weighting constants by a context-specific factor, and perform the analysis as normal. Due to the difficulties involved in prescribing an exact covariance function for our interpolation procedure, we assume Gaussian covariance and consequently reduce the weights in the second step by a factor of 2 (Beckers et al. 2014). The resulting field approximates the “error reduction factor” (i.e., the extent to which the available data reduces analysis errors below background error state), where values close to one indicate the problem is well constrained by the data.

√

We treat the provision of weighting constants in Equa- tions 6–8 as a parameter tuning problem (e.g., Brook et al. 2022, 2023). Suitable weights are derived experimentally and ultimately determine the relative strength of each con- straint. The chosen values for our interpolation problem are as follows: 𝜆ℎ = 0.5, 𝜆𝑑 = 0.01, and 𝜆𝑏 = 2. The split Bregman optimization algorithm is used to minimize Equation 5 due to its applicability for mixed ℓ1–ℓ2 norms

(limited to 5 inner, and 10 outer iterations; Goldstein and Osher 2009; Ravasi and Vasconcelos 2020).

3. Radar Frequency Correction

A major limitation of the approach outlined in Section 2 is the utilization of C- and S-band radars in the Aus- tralian archive (wavelengths ∼5 and ∼10 cm, respectively). MESH was developed using only S-band radars from the US WSR-88D radar network, and several theoretical chal- lenges arise when attempting to apply it to C-band radars. One primary concern is the increased signal attenuation due to hail at C-band (Battan 1971), causing the observed reflectivity (and subsequent MESH values) to diminish relative to S-band. Various correction techniques have been proposed for attenuation at C-band (e.g., Gu et al. 2011), however they require polarimetric data and under- correct hail-induced attenuation (Borowska et al. 2011). To the authors’ knowledge, no single-polarized hail atten- uation correction exists and thus none is implemented in Instead, we aim to indirectly account for at- this study. tenuation in a climatological sense using the corrections that follow5, while acknowledging the inevitable loss of information at C-band.

The second major methodological challenge in imple- menting MESH at C-band arises due to non-Rayleigh scattering. Both theoretical scattering calculations (e.g., Ryzhkov et al. 2013) and observational studies (Kaltenboeck and Ryzhkov 2013) indicate that complex scattering effects from hail are more prominent at C-band, reducing the reflectivity response relative to S-band. Re- cently, Cecchini et al. (2022) refit the original 𝑍– (cid:164)𝐸 relation- ship (Equation 1, Waldvogel et al. 1978, hereafter W78) at both C- and S-bands using updated mass/terminal veloc- ity relationships, while also considering the nonsphericity, varying density and complex scattering effects of natural (cid:164)𝐸 is strongly hailstones. Their analysis confirmed that modulated by the frequency of the illuminating radar, as C-band radars are less sensitive to large hail. However, since the MESH formulation and thresholds used for hail detection (see Table 1) have been developed using the W78 relationship, these updated and likely more accurate rela- tionships may not be directly applied in our analysis. This would require refitting the empirical SHI–MESH func- tion and hail detection thresholds using hail reports (e.g., Murillo and Homeyer 2019), which is outside the scope of our study. Instead, we attempt to generate a C-band ana- logue for the W78 relationship, which aims to account for the aforementioned frequency biases at C-band while re- maining compatible with the existing MESH formulation.6

5We differentiate between a correction made on a climatological basis (which aims to offset the net climatological difference between C- and S-band radars) and one that aims to correct attenuation effects for individual cases.

6The empirical C-band analogue of the W78 relationship derived here should not be compared directly to the C-band 𝑍– (cid:164)𝐸 relationship derived

C-band MESH may be of lower quality due to the reduced information content; however, previous studies have shown that it remains a skillful hail discriminator (Kunz and Kugel 2015; Skripniková and Rezáčová 2014; Stržinar and Skok 2018). The empirical correction procedure we apply in our study ensures that frequency-related biases are optimally mitigated between C- and S-band radars.

To establish our empirical correction, we examine six regions in the Australian archive with overlapping C–S- band coverage (illustrated in Fig. 3a). These regions were selected from the set of all C–S-band overlaps (refer to Fig. 1) due to their sufficient overlapping coverage area (>4000 km2) and number of co-sampled hail events (>100). The fitting procedure involved extracting time pairs where the C- and S-band radars both observed MESH >10 mm within the overlapping observation region, separated by a delay of less than two minutes to ensure temporal proximity. The 10-mm MESH threshold was selected to include events that may be initially underestimated by the C-band radars but could be incorporated into the 30-mm hail archive af- ter correction. Once cosampling times were identified, all reflectivity data above the 0◦C isotherm (i.e., only re- flectivities that contribute to MESH) were extracted for columns exceeding the 10-mm MESH threshold, and the nearest pixels were matched between C–S bands for anal- ysis. The pre-correction reflectivity fits for each region are shown in red in Fig. 3b–g, confirming the theoretical considerations discussed earlier: C-bands underestimate hail reflectivities compared to S-bands. Encouraged by the aforementioned frequency-dependent fits developed by Cecchini et al. (2022), we attempt to derive a similar cor- rection empirically by linearly fitting observed reflectivities from the two frequency bands in an attempt to normalize the hail size estimates between them. As we aim to apply a single correction for all C-band radars in the archive (Fig. 3h), we combine the C- and S-band reflectivities for all six analysis regions and apply an iterative orthogonal linear regression technique to arrive at the following corrections:

𝑍S = 1.113 · 𝑍C − 3.929 (cid:164)𝐸 = 2.34 × 10−6 · 100.093𝑍C ,

where Equation 9 was substituted into into the original W78 hail kinetic energy relationship (Equation 1) to derive its empirical C-band analogue in Equation 10. The chosen fitting technique and additional methodological consider- ations are outlined in Appendix A.

To illustrate the effectiveness of the reflectivity correc- tion in Equation 9, it is applied to C-band data in each of the overlapping C- and S-band coverage regions, resulting

in Cecchini et al. (2022) due to the aforementioned methodological additions in their study. Future work should aim to assess whether their theoretical improvements result in more accurate hail size estimates at both C- and S-band when compared to hail reports.

9

(9)

(10)

10

Fig. 3: An illustration of the hail reflectivity fitting process employed in this study. (a) Selected C- and S-band radar overlaps on the East coast of Australia, with labels indicating the panel in which the resultant data are shown. (b)-(g) Data fits for each region, including the precorrection fit between C- and S-band hail reflectivity (red), the corresponding postcorrection fit (magenta), and annotations showing the respective fit biases. A 2D histogram for the post-fit reflectivity data is included in each panel, shaded by qualitatively higher data densities. (h) The same as for regional overlap panels, except for all data combined.

in the 2D histograms shaded in Figs. 3b–h. Visual inspec- tion of these histograms, along with the post-correction fits (magenta lines), reveal that the correction improves the

negative bias for C-band reflectivity for all regions. Quanti- tatively, the mean bias improved from -2.0 to -0.4 dB for the total data, with the corresponding statistics for each region

annotated on each panel. For reference, the pre-correction bias of -2 dB corresponds to a ∼20% underestimation of MESH values at C-band (Warren et al. 2020). Substan- tial spatiotemporal overlaps in Sydney (Australia’s largest city) mean that the Kurnell/Woollongong (Fig. 3e) and Kurnell/Terrey Hills (Fig. 3f) overlaps account for ∼41% and ∼29% of the 18 million individual reflectivity compar- isons in the total fit (Fig. 3h). However, it is encouraging to note that the reflectivity correction works equally well for regions outside of Sydney that contributed fewer data points. Next, we apply this correction to all C-band radars in the archive, aiming to derive a frequency-agnostic hail climatology.

4. National Climatology

a. Data Coverage

We begin our analysis by evaluating how well the avail- able radar data constrains hail frequency estimates in Aus- tralia. Figure Fig. 4a illustrates the radar network filled with unit data following the “poor man’s error” formula- tion (refer to Section 2d). Significant data voids are ap- parent throughout the country, particularly in central WA, northern SA and western NSW. These areas are devoid of radars due to their sparse population and the fact they largely encompass Australia’s deserts. To test whether our interpolation technique is capable of propagating valid in- formation into these voids, the error reduction factor was calculated as outlined in Section 2d and shown in Fig. 4b. In general, this quantity is equal to one over land and gradually decreases to zero away from the coastline, where the analysis is dominated by the background constraint and the radar data have minimal impact. The influence of the background constraint also extends slightly inland in regions with no radar coverage along the coastline (e.g., northeast and southeast WA). Such regions are less con- strained by the radar data and should be interpreted with this in mind. It is possible to adjust the variational tuning parameters to ensure error reduction factors are close to one everywhere; however, we found that such combina- tions are prone to oversmoothing. We justify our choice of parameters by noting that the poorly constrained regions are small and that the resulting interpolated fields are a faithful representation of the underlying radar data (e.g., Fig. 5). Error reduction factors being close to unity almost everywhere over land validates our assumption that data voids are adequately constrained at our chosen analysis resolution.

Although Fig. 4b demonstrates that there is sufficient data coverage across the continent, the strength of that data coverage is highly heterogeneous. To quantify the strength of the data in regions with adequate coverage (error reduction factor > 0.9), we recalculate the error reduction factor for each grid point, this time setting the data at that If the artificial data is placed grid point equal to zero.

in a data void, the analysis will be strongly influenced by it and the result will be close to zero. Conversely, if the point is inserted into a data-rich region, the addition of extra data will have less influence, and the result will be closer to one. The resulting field is therefore a quantitative assessment of the strength of radar coverage, with higher values indicating stronger coverage.

Fig. 4c reveals that the radar network strongly constrains the analysis around the coast, especially on the east coast. As noted earlier, the interior of the country contains large data voids, and the radar coverage strength is much lower there as a result. Interestingly, the coverage strength is not directly proportional to the distance to the nearest mea- surement. For example, small radar data gaps in southeast QLD and northeast NSW (Fig. 4a) do not cause a signifi- cant drop in this quantity, as they are surrounded by valid data on all sides. In contrast, the coverage strength in west- ern NSW drops immediately when crossing into that data void, as it is unbounded on its northern and western edges. Regions with weaker coverage strength should be assigned lower confidence, as the data is sourced from more dis- tant measurements, and the analysis is more sensitive to measurement errors. The 0.25 coverage strength contour from Fig. 4c is hatched in Figs. 5b and 6 to illustrate the fact that both data coverage and coverage strength should be taken into account when interpreting the subsequent national climatology.

b. Annual Hail Frequency

Having discussed the intricacies of the chosen interpo- lation procedure, we present the resulting interpolated hail climatology in Fig. 5. The most notable feature is the broad hail frequency maximum located on the east coast of Australia, roughly situated south of Mackay in south- east Queensland and north of Sydney in northeast New South Wales. The highest hail frequencies are observed close to the coastline south of Brisbane, proximal to the Great Dividing Range (topography illustrated in Fig. 1). These findings are consistent with previous studies in the Australian region (e.g., Allen and Allen 2016; Bedka et al. 2018). The position and size of this hail-prone region is similar to the hail environment-filtered overshooting top climatology in Bedka et al. (2018), but extends slightly further inland than their study suggests. This inland prop- agation is partially influenced by a high number of observed events in southwestern NSW (near the SA/NSW/VIC bor- der, Fig. 5a). Manual quality control affirms the legitimacy of these events, but the frequency disparity compared to the surrounding region suggests that this feature may be a climatological anomaly. Although the interpolation pro- cedure smooths such features towards the “climatological mean”, the anomalous information still propagates into the data void in western NSW. The limited data strength in this region (Fig. 4c), limits our confidence in how far west

11

12

Fig. 4: An illustration of important quantities for interpreting the variational interpolation method used in this study. (a) Data extent of the radar network (filled with unit data according to the poor man’s error method). (b) The corresponding poor main’s error estimate, a short-hand measure of data coverage. (c) The same but for “strength” of the available radar coverage, refer to text for more details.

this hail maximum extends. The recent installation of two radars (Hillston and Brewarrina) largely fills the western NSW radar void and will help alleviate these uncertainties as more data become available in years to come.

Radar-based hail frequencies drop off appreciably south of Sydney, with annual frequencies on the order of 0.05 year−1 across Victoria and southern South Australia. Hail- storms in this region are known to be associated with the passage of frontal systems, which can initiate thunder- storms in otherwise marginal environments. Zhou et al. (2021) demonstrated that these low instability and mod- erate to high shear hail environments are dominant in the high latitudes, where cooler temperature profiles also in- crease the likelihood of hailstones reaching the surface. Previous remote sensing studies have suggested that these relatively shallow hailstorms may result in an underes- timation of hail frequencies in southern regions such as Melbourne and Canberra (Bedka et al. 2018; Punge et al. 2018). While there are numerous hail reports in these ar- eas (e.g., Bedka et al. 2018), the reported sizes are smaller on average, reflecting less hail growth due to reduced pre- cipitable water and weaker instability (Allen and Allen 2016). As a result, a greater proportion of hailstorms and hail reports will be correctly overlooked by our 30-mm MESH threshold. It is also possible that MESH is poorly calibrated for detecting large hail due to these structural dif- ferences and underestimates the true frequency of hail in southern Australia (having been empirically fit to hail size reports in Oklahoma and Florida, Witt et al. 1998). Future work should investigate the relative accuracy of MESH

estimates against hail reports for different high-population centers around the country.

On the west coast, radar coverage is limited to the coast- line in the north but extends further inland in the Wheatbelt region between Perth and Kalgoorlie. Both regions exhibit elevated hail frequencies (>0.1 yr−1), the first along the coastline between Exmouth and Broome and the second in the Goldfields region around Kalgoorlie. Both signatures appear fragmented in the observed radar frequencies (Fig. 5a), with disparate frequencies detected at adjacent grid points. Once again, the interpolation procedure tempers isolated high-frequency points to estimate the climatolog- ical mean. The result is a broad region of elevated hail frequency from Broome to Exmouth and around Kalgo- orlie. Notably, the latter does not extend to the coastline in the south near Perth, Australia’s fourth most populous city. The land–sea contrast is especially apparent on the north coast of WA, where hail frequencies over the ocean are nearly zero, consistent with climatologically high val- ues of convective inhibition (CIN) observed offshore in the region (Riemann-Campe et al. 2009). Other minor hail frequency maxima are observed by radars in central Aus- tralia near Alice Springs, and in northwest Queensland. The former region coincides with a collection of hail re- ports in the Australian Severe Storms Archive (Allen and Allen 2016), although it is not identified in previous studies involving other remote sensing instruments (e.g., Dowdy and Kuleshov 2014; Bang and Cecil 2019). Bedka et al. (2018) did identify a local hail maximum in the goldfields region near the WA/NT/SA border, however, this is not mirrored in the radar archive, with the Giles radar west of

Fig. 5: A national radar-based hail climatology of Australia on a 100 km grid. (a) Climatological hail frequencies calculated using the Australian radar network, with gray outlines illustrating the data extent. (b) Nationally uniform hail frequencies calculated by interpolating the available radar data, with a coverage strength = 0.25 contour hatched in gray.

Alice Springs showing little hail activity. The other local maximum near Burketown is also observed in the light- ning climatology record of Dowdy and Kuleshov (2014), and is probably associated with low-level convergence in the Queensland heat low (Sturman and Tapper 1996) and the onshore passage of cloud lines from the Gulf of Car- pentaria (Drosdowsky and Holland 1987).

ond, the lack of wind shear in the tropics (e.g., Allen and Allen 2016; Zhou et al. 2021) means that hail-producing storms are comparatively shorter-lived, as outflows from mature cells disrupt their own inflows (May et al. 2002). These structural differences likely reduce the potential up- draft residence time, which is critical for hail growth (e.g., Kumjian et al. 2021).

Tropical radars north of Broome and Cairns (latitudes ∼18 and 17◦S, respectively) exhibit minimal hail activity in our analysis, which is noteworthy for two reasons: 1) these findings may represent the first climatological application of MESH at such latitudes, and 2) previous hail climatology methodologies tend to overestimate hail occurrence in the tropics. These methods include satellite brightness tem- peratures (e.g., Bang and Cecil 2019), overshooting tops (e.g., Bedka et al. 2018) and hail/severe storm proxies (e.g., Prein and Holland 2018). All such methods are sensitive to tall, overshooting clouds in high-instability environments, which occur commonly in the absence of severe surface hail in the tropics. Several complementary factors are likely responsible for the absence of hail in the region. Firstly, vigorous warm-rain processes below the freezing level are thought to simultaneously limit the amount of supercooled liquid water and increase the number of competing hail embryos in the hail growth zone (Cotton et al. 2010). Sec-

Both structural and microphysical limitations discussed here dictate that hail observed aloft is mostly small (1–2 cm, May et al. 2002), and likely melts before reaching the surface due to typical temperature profiles in the tropics (Foote 1984). To the contrary, Bang and Cecil (2021) demonstrated that spaceborne Ku-band radar reflectivity profiles are mostly consistent across tropical and subtropi- cal hailstorms identified using different passive microwave detection methods. We propose that this discrepancy arises due to complex scattering and attenuation at Ku band radar frequencies, which reduces the reflectivity response for larger hail sizes relative to S-band and limits the informa- tion content available for hail size discrimination (Ryzhkov et al. 2013; Cao et al. 2013). A notable finding in Section 3 is the substantial impact of these effects at C-band fre- quencies, implying even more pronounced consequences at Ku-band. Additionally, the results presented here in- dicate that unlike Ku-band radars, ground-based S-band

13

14

and corrected C-band radars effectively distinguish larger hydrometeors likely to reach the ground without melting, thereby minimizing the overestimation of hail frequencies in tropical regions. Admittedly, this analysis is limited to the available radar coverage, which excludes most of the Kimberley coast region in northwest Australia (see Fig. 1)7, where other remotely sensed hail (e.g., Bang and Ce- cil 2019) and severe storm climatologies (e.g., Dowdy and Kuleshov 2014) notably highlight as a hotspot. However, based on the findings in Section 4a, we expect that the avail- able radar data adequately constrains hail frequency esti- mates across tropical Australia. The ground-radar-based assessment of tropical hail frequency shown here appears realistic when compared to Severe Storm Archive hail re- ports (Allen and Allen 2016) and aligns quantitatively with a 20-year climatology compiled from press reports by the Queensland Regional Meteorological Office (Frisby and Sansom 1967), with the 1-in-10 year (0.1 yr−1) and 1-in- 20 year (0.05 yr−1) isolines terminating around Mackay and Cairns, respectively.

c. Hail Seasonality

The final result presented in this section concerns the seasonality of the Australian hail climatology. Fig. 6 presents interpolated monthly hail frequencies, calculated using normalized months to ensure an even sample size for each month. Segmenting the historical archive in this manner naturally limits the data available for each inter- polation, potentially challenging our assumption that the observed data are a sufficiently representative sample of the actual climatological hail frequency. These limitations can lead to “patchy” hail frequencies for months such as November and February (Figs. 6e and 6h, respectively), which appear to be affected by climatological anomalies that arise due to the limited duration of the archive. We proceed in discussing the seasonal climatology with these limitations in mind.

While some hail activity is observed on the east coast as early as September, the hail season begins in earnest in October. Early season events are mostly concentrated in southern Queensland and progressively move south as the season advances. Note that the gap observed between Brisbane and Sydney in December and January likely re- flects the lack of radar observations in the region (Fig. 5a). By February, the East coast hail frequency maximum has shifted south to around Sydney, showing a steady poleward trend in the intervening months. This aligns with global satellite observations made by Zhou et al. (2021), who suggested that the poleward shift coincides with increases in temperature and moisture at higher latitudes throughout the summer. Locally, Allen and Karoly (2014) and Warren et al. (2020) showed how these effects lead to a poleward

7An important exception is the Broome radar that covers the Dampier

Peninsula on the western fringe of the Kimberleys.

shift in instability as the Austral summer progresses, par- ticularly along the east coast. Conversely, the weakening of lapse rates in the absence of favorable upper-level support results in an overall reduction in hail-producing instabil- ity/shear environments in Queensland as the summer pro- gresses (Allen and Karoly 2014; Warren et al. 2020). As a result, the seasonal cycle is comparatively broader and later in NSW (November–March), a finding that is also re- flected in hail reports from greater Sydney (Schuster et al. 2005).

Outside the east coast maximum, hail frequencies in- crease markedly throughout the country in November. This timing coincides with the arrival of continental heat troughs and their associated moisture transport to much of inland Australia (Sturman and Tapper 1996; Hung and Yanai 2004). This moisture, along with suitable upper- level support during late spring or early summer, provides favorable conditions for hail activity in those months, rem- iniscent of the seasonal climatology of convection in the Great Plains of the United States (Fabry et al. 2017). Under this hypothesis, the collective reduction in hail activity in January–February is a result of a warmer upper atmosphere as the summer progresses. Allen and Karoly (2014) also cited the importance of inland troughs in mid to late sum- mer for storm development across inland Western Australia (WA). Hailstorms on the west coast of the country remain subdued until later in the season around February, consis- tent with the overshooting top-based climatology of Bedka et al. (2018). It is also worth noting that the only major hailstorm to impact the southwest capital city of Perth oc- curred similarly late in the season (March 2010, Buckley et al. 2010). Hailstorms persist in southern WA later than most of the country, likely due to their association with strong frontal systems that are capable of triggering hail- storms well into Autumn in the absence of strong instability (Allen and Karoly 2014).

5. Regional Analysis

Having presented the national climatology in Section 4, five regions of interest were identified for further investiga- tion in this section. These regions were selected based on the discussion in Section 4 (e.g., northwest Australia and the Goldfields regions) and their significance as population centers (e.g., Brisbane and Sydney). We have increased the spatial resolution of the regional climatologies to a 10 km grid; however, this is limited to areas within radar coverage in the absence of spatial interpolation.

The first region of interest is situated in northwest Aus- tralia, encompassing the Broome and Port Hedland radars. The high resolution climatology in Fig. 7a reveals a pro- nounced land–sea contrast, with elevated hail frequencies beginning roughly 10–30 km inland from the coastline. This highlights the important role of sea breeze circula- tions for thunderstorm initiation in the tropical Australia

Fig. 6: Interpolated monthly hail frequencies derived from the Australian radar archive on a 100 km grid with a coverage strength = 0.25 contour hatched in gray. Months are normalized into twelve equally spaced periods and are displayed centered on the Austral summer.

(e.g., Carbone et al. 2000; May et al. 2002). The land– sea contrast may also reflect the climatologically high val- ues of CIN offshore (Riemann-Campe et al. 2009) that acts to suppress convection even in the presence of strong low-level convergence (e.g., associated with land breezes; Wapler and Lane 2012). Fig. 7f shows that once storms do initiate, most move toward the west, associated with easterly trade winds or monsoon return flow, depending on the time of year. While storms do initiate inland and generally move offshore, Fig. 7a shows that almost all dis- sipate before reaching the coastline. Fig. 8a also shows that hail streaks are, on average, shorter in northwest Australia, further substantiating the ephemeral nature of hailstorms in the region. The seasonal distribution of hailstorms in the region is distinctly bimodal (Fig. 8b), with the break in

December coinciding with the average arrival of the mon- soon (Hung and Yanai 2004). It is likely that increases in column-integrated moisture and weaker lapse rates as- sociated with the active monsoon suppress hail activity during this period. It remains unclear whether MESH de- tections are substantiated by hailfall at the surface in these remote regions due to the extremely low population den- sity. However, the coastal offset illustrated in Fig. 7a may explain why tropical population centers on the coast rarely encounter hail, yet a surprising number of hail reports have been noted in the inland road network in northwest Aus- tralia (Allen and Allen 2016).

The second region, located in northeastern Australia at a latitude similar to the first, provides an additional validation source for the characteristics of tropical hailstorms. Fig.

15

16

Fig. 7: Regional hail climatologies from five regions of interest. (a)–(e) Hail frequencies direct from the radar data on a 10 km grid (no interpolation), for the northwest Australia (NWA), North Queensland (NQ), Brisbane, Sydney and southwest Australia (SWA) regions, respectively. Progressively darker gray contours show the 250, 750 and 1250 m topography levels, dotted lines represent state/territory borders and circular gray lines illustrate radar coverage extents. Note that panels (a), (b) and (d) have been rotated for ease of presentation, refer to north arrows and locations in inset panels for orientation. (f)–(j) Rose plots for storm directions in each region (pointing in the direction of storm motion).

7b shows that the overall hail frequency, and spatial offset from the coastline is similar to northwest Australia, albeit with increased offshore activity in the southern parts of the domain. Unlike coastal population centers on the west coast, non-zero hail frequencies extend to the coastline near Mackay, which notably recorded Australia’s largest mea- sured hailstone nearby in 2021 (16 cm in diameter, BoM 2021). Fig. 7g shows that storms predominantly move off- shore toward the northeast, perhaps reflecting the southerly component required for significant instability aloft at these latitudes. These types of systems typically occur in late spring and early summer (Section 4), before the monsoon regime draws in tropical air masses from the east later in the season (Sturman and Tapper 1996). Figs. 8a and 8c also confirm that, similar to the northwest Australia region, these tropical hail events are shorter in length and occur later in the day than their subtropical counterparts. The comparatively late diurnal cycle in the tropics (both north- western and northeastern regions, usually between 4–6 pm

local time) is consistent with that of overshooting convec- tion in other locations in northern Australia such as Cairns and Darwin (Bedka et al. 2018).

The next region of interest coincides with the na- tional hail frequency maximum in southeast Queens- land/northeast New South Wales. This region contains the highest hail frequencies on the continent, consistent with prior hail climatologies (McMaster 2001; Schuster et al. 2005; Bedka et al. 2018). The maximum hail frequency west of Casino in Fig. 7c also aligns closely with the re- gional MESH-based climatology in Warren et al. (2020). It is difficult to compare the maximum frequency values observed (2.5 hail days per year per 100 km2 in Warren et al. (2020) versus ∼0.9 hailstorms per year here) due to methodological differences used for frequency estimation in both studies (see Section 2c). The highest hail fre- quencies occur on either side of the QLD/NSW border, which follows the ridge top of the McPherson mountain range. The observed hail maxima along sloping terrain,

Fig. 8: Normalized probability density functions of hailstorm statistics for the five regions of interest identified in Section 5 and the entire archive (total). (a) Length of the hail streak major axis, (b) seasonal cycle measured by hailstorm counts over 24 equally spaced time periods (∼bi-weekly), (c) diurnal cycle measured by hourly counts of active hailstorms measured in local solar time (LST).

rather than mountain peaks, is consistent with local thun- derstorm initiation hypotheses, including thermally driven valley winds, orographic lifting, and leeward convergence

of obstructed flows (Sturman and Tapper 1996; Soderholm et al. 2017a; Nisi et al. 2018; Warren et al. 2020). A sec- ondary hail maximum to the northwest of Brisbane was

17

18

also observed by Soderholm et al. (2017a), who hypothe- sized that storm intensification may be promoted by latent heat fluxes from nearby Lakes Wivenhoe and Somerset. Fig. 7h indicates predominantly northeasterly storm mo- tion, consistent with the dominant westerly steering flow in the subtropics and influence of southerly airmasses for high-end thunderstorm events in the region (Soderholm et al. 2019). Previously identified southwest–northeast storm pathways may be identified in Fig. 7c (e.g., from the border ranges toward Brisbane, Soderholm et al. 2017a; Warren et al. 2020), along with a prominent storm path- way off the coast east of Casino.

Hail frequencies are generally concentrated on the coastal plain to the east of the Great Dividing Range in Fig. 7c. Along with the previously mentioned initiation mechanisms, this region is thought to be more favorable for hailstorms due to interactions with sea breezes (which supplement low-level moisture and wind shear), and more localized factors such as added latent heat fluxes from irrigated farmland and urban heat island effects (Soder- holm et al. 2017a,b). Accordingly, hail frequencies reduce substantially onto the elevated New England Tableland in northeastern NSW, which is roughly traced by the 750 m elevation contour in Fig. 7c.8 Hail frequencies appear to drop spuriously in regions solely covered by the Grafton radar, which is known to display persistently poor calibra- tion and hardware-related insensitivity (M. Curtis, 2023, personal communication, Bureau of Meteorology). De- spite these issues, Grafton data were included in Fig. 7 to illustrate hail frequencies in a relative sense across northern NSW, due to the region’s importance as a climatological hail maximum (see Fig. 5). The Grafton radar was not included in the national climatology (Appendix B) due to these reasons.

The pattern of hail activity along the southern stretches of the NSW coastline, around Sydney, depicted in Fig. 7d is generally similar to that in northeastern NSW. Hailstorms are concentrated on the coastal plain, with a particular prevalence on the eastern slopes of the Great Dividing Range. Hail frequencies appear to diminish atop elevated topography (>750 m), preferring mountain slopes rather than peaks. As a result, hail frequencies drop off consider- ably in the Snowy Mountains south of Canberra, and more broadly south of Sydney. Schuster et al. (2005) also noted a marked drop in hail reports to Sydney’s south, despite the large population density. Fig. 7i supports the general picture of hail activity in the region, whereby storms initi- ate along the ranges to the east, before tracking eastward, intensifying across the coastal plain, and finally dissipat- ing over the ocean (Potts et al. 2000; Schuster et al. 2005; Warren et al. 2020). Oceanic hailstorms appear to be more

8Interestingly, older report-based climatologies indicate that the number of hail reports and crop losses are comparable between the New England Tableland and the coastal plain (McMaster 2001; Schuster et al. 2005), likely a result of their earlier study periods.

common in the Sydney region compared to Brisbane (War- ren et al. 2020), aligning with the increased prevalence of lightning offshore in the region (Dowdy and Kuleshov 2014).

The final region of interest is the Goldfields region in southwestern Australia (Fig. 7e). The temperate climate and proximity to the southern ocean dictate that strong frontal systems are a dominant driver of storm activity in the region (Sturman and Tapper 1996; Allen and Karoly 2014). As a result of these broad-scale initiation mecha- nisms, hail frequencies are generally quite uniform spa- tially, with a less-pronounced land–sea contrast. The southeasterly directions shown in Fig. 7j are consistent with the orientation of prefrontal troughs, which form ahead of southern ocean cold fronts roughly twice a month in sum- mer (Hanstrum et al. 1990a). These setups advect warm continental air toward the southeast during their passage across the southern parts of the continent, triggering severe thunderstorms under favorable environmental conditions (Hanstrum et al. 1990a,b), and are commonly responsi- ble for hailstorms across southern Australia (Buckley et al. 2010). Fig. 8a. also shows the resulting hail streaks in southern WA are notably longer than those in the rest of the country.

6. Summary and Future Directions

This study aimed to develop a national radar-based hail climatology with a broad focus on the national- and regional-scales. Challenges unique to the Australian radar archive (e.g., varying radar frequencies and limited spa- tial coverage) complicated these endeavors, and various methodological advances were required to achieve the ob- jectives of the study. The main methodological contribu- tions outlined in this study are as follows:

The introduction of an object-based hail process- ing algorithm enabled the calculation of resolution- invariant hail frequencies, which are more intuitive for individual observers and enable intercomparison between studies.

A hail reflectivity correction was proposed for cal- culating Maximum Estimated Size of Hail (MESH) estimates at C-band, minimizing climatological dif- ferences with S-bands in the Australian archive.

A novel variational method for interpolating radar- based hail frequencies across the country was intro- duced to produce a spatially continuous national hail climatology.

These methodological advances permitted the investiga- tion of hail occurrence across the aforementioned range of spatial scales. First, the hail frequencies were estimated on a national scale in Section 4, and showed a broad hail max- imum on the east coast of the country between roughly

Mackay and Sydney. The radar-based archive indicates that hailstorms occur once every 3–5 years at individual locations on the east coast. Elevated hail frequencies also occur on the northwest coast and inland stretches of south- west Australia, but are less than half as frequent as those on the east coast.

Regional climatologies showed that hailstorms occur most frequently on the eastern slopes of the Great Dividing Range around the Brisbane and Sydney regions (one hail event every ∼1–2 years). Tropical hailstorms were found to be shorter in terms of length and initiate later in the day with a strong land–sea contrast. Subtropical hailstorms on the East coast were found to shift poleward through- out the summer, starting in Queensland in November and progressing toward Sydney by March. Finally, temperate hailstorms in southern Australia were observed to produce longer hail streaks and mainly propagate toward the south- east, corresponding with known synoptic-scale drivers in the region.

During this study, several important avenues for future work were identified. First, secondary data sources, such as hail proxies from weather models or various satellite- based products, should be used to help constrain hail fre- quency estimates in areas with poor radar coverage, such as western New South Wales. These data sources may be incorporated as an additional background constraint in the variational interpolation method introduced herein. Fur- ther research should also investigate the accuracy of MESH for hail identification in different climatic regions such as the tropics and southern Australia, using hail both hail reports and comparisons with satellite-based remote sens- ing products. These studies should also investigate how storm-driven hail advection, melting, and size sorting can also affect radar-based climatological assessments (e.g., Brook et al. 2021). Finally, future research should also explore how the radar archive may be used to identify long-term trends and interannual/decadal variability pre- viously noted in the Australian hail climatology (Schuster et al. 2005; Allen and Karoly 2014), in the context of how they may be evolving in a changing climate.

APPENDIX A

Iterative Orthogonal Linear Regression

We expect the reflectivity response of large hail to dimin- ish at C-band due the theoretical considerations outlined in Section 3. Here, we attempt to correct C-band hail re- flectivities to match that at S-band, where the chosen hail detection methodology was developed. The fitting proce- dure used to generate the correction is a linear orthogonal regression. This technique is suitable for our purposes, as it considers measurement error in both 𝑥 and 𝑦 variables, which is distinct from an ordinary least squares regression

that assumes the 𝑥 variable is known without error. Or- thogonal regression is also suitable for our application due to our use of point-matched values of the same variable, which, due to the identical matching procedure employed to both, we may assume to have equal variance (York 1966). Carroll and Ruppert (1996) show that orthogonal regres- sion may be misused if the ratio of input variable variance is incorrectly specified, or due to nonlinearities in the un- derlying dataset. Despite these concerns, we consider it an appropriate technique for our case and employ an efficient FORTRAN implementation (Boggs et al. 1989).

The aim is to fit only those reflectivities that correspond to MESH detections, which dictates data is taken from above the 0◦C isotherm in columns where MESH exceeds 10 mm (refer to Section 3 for a discussion on the 10-mm MESH threshold). We also only use data above 40 dBZ, as in the MESH formulation. Orthogonal regression is used to fit C- and S-band reflectivities as the 𝑥 and 𝑦 variables, respectively, resulting in a standard linear function : 𝑦 = 𝑚𝑥 + 𝑐, where 𝑚 and 𝑐 are the linear coefficients. When the correction is applied to the 𝑦 data, the initial fit is transposed as follows:

𝑌1 =

𝑦0 − 𝑐1 𝑚1

where 𝑌 denotes the corrected 𝑦 data, 𝑦0 is the initial 𝑦 data and subscripts denote the nth correction. Depending on the sign of the correction, 𝑌1 may now contain data above or below the 40 dBZ threshold, which should be included or excluded from the fitting calculation, respec- tively. This problem is analogous to one encountered in radar calibration, where spaceborne reflectivity data above a certain threshold are used to calculate a calibration off- set (Protat et al. 2011; Warren et al. 2018). The solution arises by proceeding iteratively, applying the correction and filtering the data according to the threshold at each step. The linear corrections in our case introduce addi- tional complexity (compared to the constant offset used in radar calibration), and we now describe how the final cor- rection may be obtained from the fit at each iteration. Once the 40 dBZ threshold has been applied to 𝑌1, we recorrect the data in the second iteration:

𝑌2 =

𝑌1 − 𝑐2 𝑚2

=

𝑦0 −𝑐1 𝑚1

− 𝑐2

𝑚2

where Equation A1 was substituted in the final expression. The refitting process continues until the difference between the coefficients 𝑚 and 𝑐 in consecutive iterations is less than a user-defined convergence criterion (𝜖, where 𝜖 = 1 × 10−4 in this study). The resulting correction when applying the refitting procedure for 𝑛 iterations is generalized below,

𝑌𝑛 =

𝑦𝑜

(cid:206)𝑛

𝑖=1

𝑚𝑖

−

𝑛 ∑︁

𝑖=1

𝑐𝑖 𝑗=𝑖 𝑚 𝑗

(cid:206)𝑛

.

19

(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

20

APPENDIX B

Radar Information

Table B1: Relevant information for radars used in this study. Missing end dates indicate radars were still operational at the end of the study period, altitudes indicate antenna height above sea level, and beam widths are measured in degrees to half-power. Refer to https://openradar.io/ for further details.

Location

Radar Type

Start Date

End Date

Dur. (yr)

Lat. (◦S)

Lon. (◦E)

Alt. (m)

Freq.

Adelaide (B. Park) Adelaide (S. Hill) Albany Alice Springs Bairnsdale Bowen Brisbane (Marburg) WSR74S Brisbane (Mt Stap.) Meteor1500SDP Broome Cairns Canberra Carnarvon Ceduna Dampier Darwin (Berrimah) Emerald Esperence Geraldton Giles Gladstone Gove Grafton Gympie Halls Creek Hobart Kalgoorlie Katherine (Tindal) Learmouth Longreach Mackay Melbourne Mildura Moree Mornington Island Mount Isa N.W. Tasmania Namoi Newcastle Perth (Serpentine) Port Hedland Rockhampton South Doodlakine Sydney (Kurnell) Sydney (T. Hills) Tennant Creek Townsville Warrego Warruwi Weipa Wollongong Woomera Yarrawonga

Meteor1500SDP WSR81C Meteor735CDP WF100-6C Wurrung-2502C WF100-6C

DWSR2502C DWSR2502C DWSR74S DWSR2502C DWSR2502C WRM200CDP DWSR2502C DWSR8502S Meteor735CDP Meteor735CDP WF100-5C WSR74S TVDR2500 WSR74S DWSR8502S WF100-5C DWSR2502C DWSR2502C WSR81C TVDR2500 WF100-6C TVDR2500 Meteor1500SDP WF100-5C WF100-5C WSR81C DWSR8502S Wurrung-2502C DWSR8502S DWSR74S TVDR2500 TVDR2500 WF100C Wurrung-2502C WF100-6C Meteor1500SDP WF100C DWSR2502C TVDR2500 DWSR2502C WF100C DWSR8502S WF100-6C WF100-6C

27/10/2005 01/01/2000 21/02/2003 28/10/2003 06/05/2008 07/05/2004 01/01/2000 08/06/2006 18/03/2008 11/01/2000 22/11/2002 07/12/2004 06/01/2002 13/08/2009 07/12/2000 09/03/2010 19/02/2003 08/02/2003 15/10/2003 01/01/2000 01/10/2002 01/01/2000 01/01/2000 26/03/2008 22/03/2012 13/11/2003 15/10/2003 11/02/2008 18/12/2000 01/01/2000 01/01/2000 01/01/2002 01/01/2000 01/01/2000 14/09/2012 01/01/2000 02/06/2010 01/01/2000 02/02/2010 12/03/2008 01/01/2000 15/02/2017 01/01/2000 15/05/2009 10/07/2007 03/08/2011 06/10/2006 15/11/2012 01/01/2000 01/01/2000 04/01/2001 25/06/2002

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 15/03/2021 - - - - - - - - 31/08/2014 - - - 30/06/2015 - - - 11/10/2015 - - -

16.2 22.0 18.9 18.2 13.7 17.7 22.0 15.6 13.8 22.0 19.1 17.1 20.0 12.4 21.1 11.8 18.9 18.9 18.2 22.0 19.3 22.0 22.0 13.8 9.8 18.1 18.2 13.9 21.0 22.0 22.0 19.2 22.0 22.0 9.3 22.0 11.6 22.0 11.9 13.8 14.7 4.9 22.0 12.6 8.0 10.4 15.2 9.1 15.8 22.0 21.0 19.5

34.62 -35.33 -34.94 -23.80 -37.89 -19.89 -27.61 -27.72 -17.95 -16.82 -35.66 -24.89 -32.13 -20.65 -12.46 -23.55 -33.83 -28.80 -25.03 -23.86 -12.28 -29.62 -25.96 -18.23 -43.11 -30.78 -14.51 -22.10 -23.43 -21.12 -37.86 -34.24 -29.49 -16.67 -20.71 -41.18 -31.02 -32.73 -32.39 -20.37 -23.38 -31.78 -34.01 -33.70 -19.64 -19.42 -26.44 -11.65 -12.67 -34.26 -31.16 -36.03

138.47 138.50 117.82 133.89 147.58 148.07 152.54 153.24 122.24 145.68 149.51 113.67 133.70 116.68 130.93 148.24 121.89 114.70 128.30 151.26 136.82 152.95 152.58 127.66 147.81 121.45 132.45 114.00 144.29 149.22 144.76 142.09 149.85 139.17 139.56 145.58 150.19 152.03 115.87 118.63 150.47 117.95 151.23 151.21 134.18 146.55 147.35 133.38 141.92 150.88 136.80 146.02

29.0 395.1 93.0 563.3 65.3 72.5 371.1 175.0 31.4 660.8 1382.7 12.0 32.0 55.0 60.0 211.3 42.9 47.7 607.4 92.5 75.7 49.8 355.0 439.4 511.7 390.0 148.4 333.3 201.6 43.9 45.0 59.3 221.5 19.6 516.7 601.0 720.0 84.0 39.8 23.8 14.0 416.0 63.8 223.5 394.0 612.5 534.4 43.7 35.0 471.6 175.9 146.0

S C C C C C S S C C S C C C C S C C C S C S S C C C C C C C S C C C S C S S C C C C C S C C C C C S C C

BWidth (◦)

1.0 1.7 1.0 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.9 1.0 1.7 1.0 1.9 1.7 1.7 1.0 1.0 1.9 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.9 1.7 1.9 1.9 1.7 1.0 1.0 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.0 2.0 1.7 1.7 1.9 1.0 1.9 1.9 1.0 1.7 1.6 1.7 1.0 1.0 1.8 1.0 1.7 1.0 1.7 1.9 1.7 1.0

The optimization converged in roughly 20 iterations for the fits illustrated in Fig. 3. Although no divergent cases were observed in our analysis, we offer no formal proof of convergence for the method outlined here.

Acknowledgments. This research was undertaken with the assistance of resources and services from the National Computational Infrastructure (NCI), which is supported by the Australian Government. Author Brook would like to acknowledge Guy Carpenter & Company, LLC for industry funding throughout their postgraduate studies. We also ac- knowledge Mark Curtis and Valentin Louf for discussions on the Australian Radar Archive.

Data availability statement. Download instructions for all data used in this study may be found in the Aus- tralian Unified Radar Archive (AURA, Soderholm et al. 2022) and are available at https://www.openradar. io/operational-network. Data processing software is available upon request to the author.

References

Allen, J., 2012: Supercell storms: Melbourne’s white Christmas 2011.

Bull. Aust. Meteorol. Oceanogr. Soc., 25, 47–51.

Allen, J. T., and E. R. Allen, 2016: A review of severe thunder- storms in Australia. Atmos. Res., 178-179 (Supplement C), 347–366, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2016.03.011.

Allen, J. T., and D. J. Karoly, 2014: A climatology of Australian severe thunderstorm environments 1979-2011: Inter-annual variability and ENSO influence. Int. J. Climatol., 34 (1), 81–97, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/joc.3667.

Allen, J. T., M. K. Tippett, W. S. Ashley, M. R. Kumjian, and D. Ca- vanaugh, 2015: The characteristics of United States hail reports: 1955-2014. Electron. J. Sev. Storms Meteor., 10 (3), 1–31.

Anagnostou, E. N., and W. F. Krajewski, 1999: Real-time radar rain- fall estimation. Part I: Algorithm formulation. J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., 16 (2), 189–197, https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0426(1999) 016<0189:RTRREP>2.0.CO;2.

Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2021: Regional population. Accessed 8 April 2023, https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/population/ regional-population/latest-release.

Bang, S. D., and D. J. Cecil, 2019: Constructing a multifrequency passive microwave hail retrieval and climatology in the GPM domain. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 58 (9), 1889–1904, https://doi.org/10. 1175/JAMC-D-19-0042.1.

Bang, S. D., and D. J. Cecil, 2021: Testing passive microwave-based hail retrievals using GPM DPR Ku-band radar. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 60 (3), 255–271, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/ JAMC-D-20-0129.1.

Barth, A., J.-M. Beckers, C. Troupin, A. Alvera-Azcárate, and L. Van- denbulcke, 2014: Divand-1.0: n-dimensional variational data anal- ysis for ocean observations. Geosci. Model Dev., 7 (1), 225–241, https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-7-225-2014.

Battan, L. J., 1971: Radar attenuation by wet ice spheres. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 10 (2), 247–252, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/ 10.1175/1520-0450(1971)010<0247:RABWIS>2.0.CO;2.

Beckers, J.-M., A. Barth, C. Troupin, and A. Alvera-Azcárate, 2014: Approximate and efficient methods to assess error fields in spa- tial gridding with data interpolating variational analysis (DIVA). J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., 31 (2), 515–530, https://doi.org/https: //doi.org/10.1175/JTECH-D-13-00130.1.

Bedka, K., J. Brunner, R. Dworak, W. Feltz, J. Otkin, and T. Green- wald, 2010: Objective satellite-based detection of overshooting tops using infrared window channel brightness temperature gradi- ents. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 49 (2), 181–202, https://doi.org/ 10.1175/2009JAMC2286.1.

Bedka, K. M., 2011: Overshooting cloud top detections using MSG SE- VIRI infrared brightness temperatures and their relationship to severe weather over Europe. Atmos. Res., 99 (2), 175–189, https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2010.10.001.

Bedka, K. M., J. T. Allen, H. J. Punge, M. Kunz, and D. Simanovic, 2018: A long-term overshooting convective cloud top detection database over Australia derived from MTSAT Japanese advanced meteorolog- ical Imager observations. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 57 (0), 937–951, https://doi.org/10.1175/JAMC-D-17-0056.1.

Bednarczyk, C.,

climatol- ogy of Australia based on lightning and reanalysis. 27th Conference on Severe Local Storms, Amer. Meteor. Soc., URL https://ams.confex.com/ams/27SLS/webprogram/Manuscript/ Paper255889/extendedAbstract_pdf.pdf.

and P. Sousounis,

2012:

Hail

Boggs, P. T., J. R. Donaldson, R. h. Byrd, and R. B. Schnabel, 1989: Algorithm 676: ODRPACK: software for weighted orthog- onal distance regression. ACM Trans. Math. Softw., 15 (4), 348–364, https://doi.org/10.1145/76909.76913.

BoM, 2021: Bureau of meteorology severe thunderstorm archive. Aust. Bureau of Meteorology, Accessed 21 June 2023, http://www.bom. gov.au/australia/stormarchive/.

Borowska, L., A. Ryzhkov, D. Zrnić, C. Simmer, and R. Palmer, 2011: Attenuation and differential attenuation of 5-cm wavelength radi- ation in melting hail. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 50 (1), 59–76, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/2010JAMC2465.1.

Briggs, I. C., 1974: Machine contouring using minimum curvature.

Geophysics, 39 (1), 39–48, https://doi.org/10.1190/1.1440410.

Brook, J. P., A. Protat, C. K. Potvin, J. S. Soderholm, and H. McGowan, 2023: The effects of spatial interpolation on a novel, dual-Doppler 3D wind retrieval technique, https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2301. 07913.

Brook, J. P., A. Protat, J. Soderholm, J. T. Carlin, H. McGowan, and R. A. Warren, 2021: Hailtrack-improving radar-based hailfall estimates by modeling hail trajectories. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 60 (3), 237– 254.

Brook, J. P., A. Protat, J. S. Soderholm, R. A. Warren, and H. McGowan, 2022: A variational interpolation method for gridding weather radar data. J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., 39 (11), 1633–1654, https://doi.org/ 10.1175/JTECH-D-22-0015.1.

Buckley, B. W., W. Sullivan, P. Chan, and M. Leplastrier, 2010: Two record breaking Australian hail storms: storm environments, damage characteristics and rarity. 25th Conference on Severe Local Storms, American Meteorological Society Denver, Colorado, 11–14.

Bunkers, M. J., and P. L. Smith, 2013: Comments on “An objective high-resolution hail climatology of the contiguous united States”.

21

22

Wea. Forecasting, 28 (3), 915–917, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10. 1175/WAF-D-13-00020.1.

Cao, Q., Y. Hong, Y. Qi, Y. Wen, J. Zhang, J. J. Gourley, and L. Liao, 2013: Empirical conversion of the vertical profile of reflectivity from Ku-band to S-band frequency. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 118 (4), 1814–1825, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50138.

Carbone, R. E., J. W. Wilson, T. D. Keenan, and J. M. Hacker, 2000: Tropical island convection in the absence of significant topogra- phy. Part I: Life cycle of diurnally forced convection. Mon. Wea. Rev., 128 (10), 3459–3480, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/ 1520-0493(2000)128<3459:TICITA>2.0.CO;2.

Carroll, R. J., and D. Ruppert, 1996: The use and misuse of orthogonal regression in linear errors-in variables models. Amer. Stat., 50 (1), 1–6, https://doi.org/10.2307/2685035.

Cecchini, M. A., A. J. Heymsfield, R. Honeyager, P. Field, L. A. T. Machado, and M. A. F. d. S. Dias, 2022: Revisiting the hail radar reflectivity–kinetic energy flux relation by combining t-matrix and discrete dipole approximation calculations to size distribution observations. J. Atmos. Sci., 79 (7), 1927–1940, https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1175/JAS-D-20-0373.1.

Cecil, D. J., 2009: Passive microwave brightness temperatures as prox- ies for hailstorms. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 48 (6), 1281–1286, https://doi.org/10.1175/2009JAMC2125.1.

Cecil, D. J., and C. B. Blankenship, 2012: Toward a global cli- matology of severe hailstorms as estimated by satellite passive microwave imagers. J. Clim., 25 (2), 687–703, https://doi.org/ 10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00130.1.

Changnon, S. A., 1970: Hailstreaks. J. Atmos. Sci., 27 (1), 109–125, https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1970)027<0109:H>2.0.CO;2.

Changnon, S. A., D. Changnon, and S. D. Hilberg, 2009: Hailstorms across the nation: an atlas about hail and its damages. Illinois State Water Survey Contract Report CR-2009-12.

Cintineo, J. L., T. M. Smith, V. Lakshmanan, H. E. Brooks, and K. L. Ortega, 2012: An objective high-resolution hail climatology of the contiguous united states. Wea. Forecasting, 27 (5), 1235–1248, https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF-D-11-00151.1.

Cotton, W. R., G. Bryan, and S. C. van den Heever, 2010: Storm and

cloud dynamics. 2nd ed., Elsevier Science, Burlington.

Dahl, N. A., A. Shapiro, C. K. Potvin, A. Theisen, J. G. Gebauer, A. D. Schenkman, and M. Xue, 2019: High-resolution, rapid-scan dual- Doppler retrievals of vertical velocity in a simulated supercell. J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., 36 (8), 1477–1500, https://doi.org/10.1175/ JTECH-D-18-0211.1.

Dowdy, A., and Y. Kuleshov, 2014: Lightning climatology of Australia: temporal and spatial variability. Aust. Meteorol. Oceanogr. J., 64, 9–14.

Dowdy, A. J., J. Soderholm, J. Brook, A. Brown, and H. Mc- Gowan, 2020: Quantifying hail and lightning risk factors us- ing long-term observations around Australia. J. Geophys. Res. At- mos., 125 (21), 2020JD033 101, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10. 1029/2020JD033101.

Drosdowsky, W., and G. J. Holland, 1987: North Australian cloud lines.

Mon. Wea. Rev., 115 (11), 2645–2659.

Dworak, R., K. Bedka, J. Brunner, and W. Feltz, 2012: Comparison be- tween goes-12 overshooting-top detections, WSR-88D radar reflec- tivity, and severe storm reports. Wea. Forecasting, 27 (3), 684–699, https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF-D-11-00070.1.

Eichner, 7 en/climate-change-and-natural-disasters/climate-change/ Icy-cricket-balls-from-above.html.

J., April

2019:

Icy cricket balls

from above. Accessed https://www.munichre.com/topics-online/

2023,

Fabry, F., V. Meunier, B. P. Treserras, A. Cournoyer, and B. Nelson, 2017: On the climatological use of radar data mosaics: possibili- ties and challenges. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 98 (10), 2135–2148, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-15-00256.1.

Ferraro, R., J. Beauchamp, D. Cecil, and G. Heymsfield, 2015: A prototype hail detection algorithm and hail climatology developed with the advanced microwave sounding unit (AMSU). Atmos. Res., 163, 24–35.

Foote, G. B., 1984: A study of hail growth utilizing observed storm conditions. J. Climate Appl. Meteor., 23 (1), 84–101, https://doi.org/ 10.1175/1520-0450(1984)023<0084:ASOHGU>2.0.CO;2.

Frisby, E. M., and H. W. Sansom, 1967: Hail incidence in the tropics. J. Appl. Meteor., 6 (2), 339–354, https://doi.org/10.1175/ 1520-0450(1967)006<0339:HIITT>2.0.CO;2.

Gabella, M., and R. Notarpietro, 2002: Ground clutter characterization and elimination in mountainous terrain. Proceedings of ERAD, 305– 311, https://www.copernicus.org/erad/online/erad-305.pdf.

Goldstein, T., and S. Osher, 2009: The split Bregman method for L1-regularized problems. SIAM J. Imaging Sci., 2 (2), 323–343, https://doi.org/10.1137/080725891.

Gu, J.-Y., A. Ryzhkov, P. Zhang, P. Neilley, M. Knight, B. Wolf, and D.-I. Lee, 2011: Polarimetric attenuation correction in heavy rain at C band. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 50 (1), 39–58, https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1175/2010JAMC2258.1.

Gunturi, P., and M. K. Tippett, 2017: Managing severe thunderstorm risk: Impact of ENSO on US tornado and hail frequencies. Tech. rep., Tech. Rep.

Hanstrum, B. N., K. J. Wilson, and S. L. Barrell, 1990a: Pre- frontal troughs over southern Australia. Part I: a climatology. Wea. Forecasting, 5 (1), 22–31, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/ 1520-0434(1990)005<0022:PTOSAP>2.0.CO;2.

Hanstrum, B. N., K. J. Wilson, and S. L. Barrell, 1990b: Pre- frontal troughs over southern Australia. Part II: a case study of frontogenesis. Wea. Forecasting, 5 (1), 32–46, https://doi.org/https: //doi.org/10.1175/1520-0434(1990)005<0032:PTOSAP>2.0.CO;2.

Heistermann, M., S. Jacobi, and T. Pfaff, 2013: Technical note: an open source library for processing weather radar data (wradlib). Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 17 (2), 863–871, https://doi.org/10.5194/ hess-17-863-2013.

Homeyer, C. R., and K. P. Bowman, 2017: Algorithm description doc- ument for version 3.1 of the three-dimensional gridded NEXRAD WSR-88D radar (GridRad) dataset. Tech. rep.

Homeyer, C. R., J. D. McAuliffe, and K. M. Bedka, 2017: On the development of above-anvil cirrus plumes in extratropical convec- tion. J. Atmos. Sci., 74 (5), 1617–1633, https://doi.org/10.1175/ JAS-D-16-0269.1.

Hung, C.-W., and M. Yanai, 2004: Factors contributing to the onset of the Australian summer monsoon. Q. J. R. Meteor. Soc., 130 (597), 739–758, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1256/qj.02.191.

Kaltenboeck, R., and A. Ryzhkov, 2013: Comparison of polarimet- ric signatures of hail at S and C bands for different hail sizes. Atmos. Res., 123, 323–336, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.atmosres.2012.05.013.

Kumjian, M. R., K. Lombardo, and S. Loeffler, 2021: The evolution of hail production in simulated supercell storms. J. Atmos. Sci., 78 (11), 3417–3440, https://doi.org/10.1175/JAS-D-21-0034.1.

Kunz, M., and P. I. S. Kugel, 2015: Detection of hail signatures from single-polarization C-band radar reflectivity. Atmos. Res., 153, 565– 577, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2014.09.010.

Lakshmanan, V., T. Smith, K. Hondl, G. J. Stumpf, and A. Witt, 2006: A real-time, three-dimensional, rapidly updating, heterogeneous radar merger technique for reflectivity, velocity, and derived products. Wea. Forecasting, 21 (5), 802–823, https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF942.1.

Langston, C., J. Zhang, and K. Howard, 2007: Four-dimensional dy- namic radar mosaic. J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., 24 (5), 776–790, https://doi.org/10.1175/JTECH2001.1.

Laroche, S., and I. Zawadzki, 1994: A variational analysis method for retrieval of three-dimensional wind field from single-Doppler radar data. J. Atmos. Sci., 51 (18), 2664–2682, https://doi.org/10.1175/ 1520-0469(1994)051<2664:AVAMFR>2.0.CO;2.

Levizzani, V., and M. Setvák, 1996: Multispectral, high-resolution satellite observations of plumes on top of convective storms. J. At- mos. Sci., 53 (3), 361–369, https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1996) 053<0361:MHRSOO>2.0.CO;2.

Louf, V., and A. Protat, 2023: Real-time monitoring of weather radar network calibration and antenna pointing. J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/JTECH-D-22-0118.1.

Lukach, M., L. Foresti, O. Giot, and L. Delobbe, 2017: Estimating the occurrence and severity of hail based on 10 years of observations from weather radar in Belgium. Meteor. Appl., 24 (2), 250–259, https://doi.org/10.1002/met.1623.

May, P. T., A. R. Jameson, T. D. Keenan, P. E. Johnston, and C. Lucas, 2002: Combined wind profiler/Polarimetric radar studies of the ver- tical motion and microphysical characteristics of tropical sea-breeze thunderstorms. Mon. Wea. Rev., 130 (9), 2228–2239, https://doi.org/ 10.1175/1520-0493(2002)130<2228:CWPPRS>2.0.CO;2.

McAneney, J., B. Sandercock, R. Crompton, T. Mortlock, R. Musulin, R. Pielke, and A. Gissing, 2019: Normalised insurance losses from Australian natural disasters: 1966–2017. Environ. Hazards, 18 (5), 414–433, https://doi.org/10.1080/17477891.2019.1609406.

McMaster, H., 2001: Hailstorm risk assessment in rural new south wales. Nat Hazards, 24 (2), 187–196, https://doi.org/10.1023/A: 1011820206279.

Mroz, K., A. Battaglia, T. J. Lang, D. J. Cecil, S. Tanelli, and F. Tri- don, 2017: Hail-detection algorithm for the GPM core observa- tory satellite sensors. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 56 (7), 1939–1957, https://doi.org/10.1175/JAMC-D-16-0368.1.

Murillo, E. M., and C. R. Homeyer, 2019: Severe hail fall and hailstorm detection using remote sensing observations. J. Appl. Meteor. Clima- tol., 58 (5), 947–970, https://doi.org/10.1175/JAMC-D-18-0247.1.

Murillo, E. M., C. R. Homeyer, and J. T. Allen, 2021: A 23-year severe hail climatology using GridRad MESH observations. Mon. Wea. Rev., 149 (4), 945–958, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/ MWR-D-20-0178.1.

Ni, X., C. Liu, D. J. Cecil, and Q. Zhang, 2017: On the detection of hail using satellite passive microwave radiometers and precipitation radar. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 56 (10), 2693–2709, https://doi.org/ 10.1175/JAMC-D-17-0065.1.

Nisi, L., A. Hering, U. Germann, and O. Martius, 2018: A 15-year hail streak climatology for the alpine region. Q. J. R. Meteor. Soc., 144 (714), 1429–1449, https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.3286.

Ortega, K., 2018: Evaluating multi-radar, multi-sensor products for surface hailfall diagnosis. Electron. J. Sev. Storms Meteor., 13 (1).

Ortega, K. L., T. M. Smith, and G. J. Stumpf, 2006: Verification of multi-sensor, multi-radar hail diagnosis techniques. Symp. on the Challenges of Severe convective Storms.

Potts, R.

Radar in the Sydney area. Mon. Wea. characteristics of Rev., 128 (9), 3308–3319, https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0493(2000) 128<3308:RCOSIT>2.0.CO;2.

J., T. D. Keenan,

and P. T. May, 2000:

storms

Prein, A. F., and G. J. Holland, 2018: Global estimates of damaging hail hazard. Wea. Clim. Extremes, 22, 10–23, https://doi.org/https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.wace.2018.10.004.

Protat, A., D. Bouniol, E. J. O’Connor, H. Klein Baltink, J. Verlinde, and K. Widener, 2011: Cloudsat as a global radar calibrator. J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., 28 (3), 445–452, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10. 1175/2010JTECHA1443.1.

Protat, A., V. Louf, J. Soderholm, J. Brook, and W. Ponsonby, 2022: Three-way calibration checks using ground-based, ship- based, and spaceborne radars. Atmos. Meas. Tech., 15 (4), 915–926, https://doi.org/10.5194/amt-15-915-2022.

Pulkkinen, S., D. Nerini, A. A. Pérez Hortal, C. Velasco-Forero, A. Seed, U. Germann, and L. Foresti, 2019: Pysteps: an open- source python library for probabilistic precipitation nowcasting (v1.0). Geosci. Model Dev., 12 (10), 4185–4219, https://doi.org/ 10.5194/gmd-12-4185-2019.

Punge, H. J., K. M. Bedka, and M. Kunz, 2018: Continental scale hail frequency estimation from geostationary satellite detection. EGU General Assembly Conference Abstracts, 15737.

Punge, H. J., K. M. Bedka, M. Kunz, S. D. Bang, and K. F. Itterly, 2021: Characteristics of hail hazard in South Africa based on satellite detection of convective storms. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 2021, 1–32, https://doi.org/10.5194/nhess-2021-342.

Raupach, T. H., J. Soderholm, A. Protat, and S. C. Sherwood, 2023: An improved instability–shear hail proxy for Australia. Mon. Wea. Rev., 151 (2), 545–567, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/ MWR-D-22-0127.1.

Ravasi, M., and I. Vasconcelos, 2020: Pylops—A linear-operator python library for scalable algebra and optimization. SoftwareX, 11, 100 361, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SOFTX.2019.100361.

Riemann-Campe, K., K. Fraedrich, and F. Lunkeit, 2009: Global cli- matology of convective available potential energy (CAPE) and con- vective inhibition (CIN) in ERA-40 reanalysis. Atmos. Res., 93 (1-3), 534–545.

23

24

Rudin, L. I., S. Osher, and E. Fatemi, 1992: Nonlinear total variation based noise removal algorithms. Phys. D: Nonlinear Phenom., 60 (1- 4), 259–268.

Ryzhkov, A. V., M. R. Kumjian, S. M. Ganson, and A. P. Khain, 2013: Polarimetric radar characteristics of melting hail. Part I: theoretical simulations using spectral microphysical modeling. J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 52 (12), 2849–2870, https://doi.org/10.1175/ JAMC-D-13-073.1.

Saltikoff, E., and Coauthors, 2019: An overview of using weather radar for climatological studies: successes, challenges, and potential. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 100 (9), 1739–1752, https://doi.org/10.1175/ BAMS-D-18-0166.1.

Schmetz, J., S. A. Tjemkes, M. Gube, and L. v. de Berg], 1997: Monitoring deep convection and convective overshooting with ME- TEOSAT. Adv. Space Res., 19 (3), 433–441, https://doi.org/https: //doi.org/10.1016/S0273-1177(97)00051-3.

Schuster, S. S., R. J. Blong, and K. J. McAneney, 2006: Relationship between radar-derived hail kinetic energy and damage to insured buildings for severe hailstorms in eastern Australia. Atmos. Res., 81 (3), 215–235, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres. 2005.12.003.

Schuster, S. S., R. J. Blong, and M. S. Speer, 2005: A hail climatology of the greater Sydney area and New South Wales, Australia. Int. J. Climatol., 25 (12), 1633–1650.

Shapiro, A., C. K. Potvin, and J. Gao, 2009: Use of a verti- cal vorticity equation in variational dual-Doppler wind analysis. J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., 26 (10), 2089–2106, https://doi.org/ 10.1175/2009JTECHA1256.1.

Shapiro, A., K. M. Willingham, and C. K. Potvin, 2010: Spatially vari- able Advection correction of radar data. Part II: test results. J. Atmos. Sci., 67 (11), 3457–3470, https://doi.org/10.1175/2010JAS3466.1.

Skripniková, K., and D. Rezáčová, 2014: Radar-based hail detection.

Atmos. Res., 144, 175–185.

Soderholm, J., V. Louf, J. Brook, and A. Protat, 2022: Australian op- erational weather radar level 1b dataset. National Computing Infras- tructure.

Soderholm, J. S., H. McGowan, H. Richter, K. Walsh, T. M. Weckwerth, and M. Coleman, 2017a: An 18-year climatology of hailstorm trends and related drivers across southeast Queensland, Australia. Q. J. R. Meteor. Soc., 143 (703), 1123–1135, https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.2995.

Soderholm, J. S., H. A. Mcgowan, H. Richter, K. Walsh, T. Wedd, and T. M. Weckwerth, 2017b: Diurnal preconditioning of subtropical coastal convective storm environments. Mon. Wea. Rev., 145 (9), 3839–3859, https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-16-0330.1.

Soderholm, J. S., K. I. Turner, J. P. Brook, T. Wedd, and J. Callaghan, 2019: High-impact thunderstorms of the Brisbane metropolitan area. J. South. Hemisphere Earth Syst. Sci., 69.

Stržinar, G., and G. Skok, 2018: Comparison and optimization of radar- based hail detection algorithms in Slovenia. Atmos. Res., 203, 275– 285, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2018.01.005.

Stumpf, G. J., T. M. Smith, and J. Hocker, 2004: New hail diagnostic parameters derived by integrating multiple radars and multiple sen- sors. Preprints, 22nd Conf. on Severe Local Storms, Hyannis, MA, Amer. Meteor. Soc. P, Vol. 7.

Sturman, A. P., and N. J. Tapper, 1996: The weather and climate of

Australia and new Zealand. Oxford University Press, USA.

Taszarek, M., J. T. Allen, T. Púčik, K. A. Hoogewind, and H. E. Brooks, 2020: Severe convective storms across Europe and the united states. Part II: ERA5 environments associated with lightning, large hail, severe wind, and tornadoes. J. Clim., 33 (23), 10 263–10 286, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-20-0346.1.

Tippett, M. K., J. T. Allen, V. A. Gensini, and H. E. Brooks, 2015: Climate and hazardous convective weather. Curr. Clim. Change Rep., 1 (2), 60–73, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-015-0006-6.

Troupin, C., and Coauthors, 2012: Generation of analysis and con- sistent error fields using the data interpolating variational anal- ysis (DIVA). Ocean Model., 52-53, 90–101, https://doi.org/https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.ocemod.2012.05.002.

Waldvogel, A., W. Schmid, and B. Federer, 1978:

The ki- netic energy of hailfalls. Part I: hailstone spectra. J. Appl. Me- teor., 17 (4), 515–520, https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0450(1978) 017<0515:TKEOHP>2.0.CO;2.

Walsh, K., and Coauthors, 2016: Natural hazards in Australia: storms, wind and hail. Clim Change, 139 (1), 55–67, https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10584-016-1737-7.

Wapler, K., and T. P. Lane, 2012: A case of offshore convec- tive initiation by interacting land breezes near Darwin, Australia. Meteor. Atmos. Phys., 115 (3), 123–137, https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00703-011-0180-6.

Warren, R. A., A. Protat, S. T. Siems, H. A. Ramsay, V. Louf, M. J. Manton, and T. A. Kane, 2018: Calibrating ground-based radars against TRMM and GPM. J. Atmos. Ocean. Technol., 35 (2), 323– 346, https://doi.org/10.1175/JTECH-D-17-0128.1.

Warren, R. A., H. A. Ramsay, S. T. Siems, M. J. Manton, J. R. Peter, A. Protat, and A. Pillalamarri, 2020: Radar-based climatology of damaging hailstorms in Brisbane and Sydney, Australia. Q. J. R. Meteor. Soc., https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.3693.

Wendt, N. A., and I. L. Jirak, 2021: An hourly climatology of operational MRMS MESH-diagnosed severe and significant hail with compar- isons to storm data hail reports. Wea. Forecasting, 36 (2), 645–659, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF-D-20-0158.1.

Wilson, C., K. Ortega, and V. Lakshmanan, 2009: Evaluating multi- radar, multisensor hail diagnosis with high resolution hail reports. 25th Conf. on Interactive Information Processing Systems, American Meteorological Society, Phoenix, AZ.

Witt, A., M. D. Eilts, G. J. Stumpf, J. T. Johnson, E. D. W. Mitchell, and K. W. Thomas, 1998: An enhanced hail detection algorithm for the WSR-88D. Wea. Forecasting, 13 (2), 286–303, https://doi.org/ 10.1175/1520-0434(1998)013<0286:AEHDAF>2.0.CO;2.

York, D., 1966: Least-squares fitting of a straight line. Can. J. Phys.,

44 (5), 1079–1086.

Zhou, Z., Q. Zhang, J. T. Allen, X. Ni, and C.-P. Ng, 2021: How many types of severe hailstorm environments are there globally? Geophys. Res. Lett., 48 (23), e2021GL095 485, https://doi.org/https: //doi.org/10.1029/2021GL095485.