arXiv:0906.0155v1  [physics.hist-ph]  31 May 2009The Rˆ ole of Astronomy in Society and Culture
Proceedings IAU Symposium No. 260, 2009
D. Valls-Gabaud & A. Boksenberg, eds.c/circlecopyrt2009 International Astronomical Union
DOI: 00.0000/X000000000000000X
The Astronomy of Aboriginal Australia
Ray P. Norris1,2and Duane W. Hamacher2
1CSIRO Australia Telescope National Facility
PO Box 76, Epping, NSW, 1710, Australia
email:Ray.Norris@csiro.au
2Department of Indigenous Studies, Macquarie University
North Ryde, NSW 2109, Australia
email:Duane.Hamacher@mq.edu.au
Abstract. The traditional cultures of Aboriginal Australians includ e a signiﬁcant astronomical
component, which is usually reported in terms of songs or sto ries associated with stars and
constellations. Here we argue that the astronomical compon ents extend further, and include
a search for meaning in the sky, beyond simply mirroring the e arth-bound understanding. In
particular, we have found that traditional Aboriginal cult ures include a deep understanding
of the motion of objects in the sky, and that this knowledge wa s used for practical purposes
such as constructing calendars. We also present evidence th at traditional Aboriginal Australians
made careful records and measurements of cyclical phenomen a, and paid careful attention to
unexpected phenomena such as eclipses and meteorite impact s.
Keywords. Australia, Aboriginal, archaeoastronomy, ethnoastronom y, history of meteoritics.
1. Introduction
Before the British occupation of Australia, there were an estimate d 400 diﬀerent Abo-
riginal cultures. Each had its own language, stories, and beliefs, alt hough most were
centred on the idea that the world was created in the “Dreaming” by ancestral spirits,
whose presence can still be seen both on the land and in the sky. The se ancestral spirits
taught humans how to live, and left a user guide to life in their songs an d stories. Many
of these stories are reﬂected in the patterns in the sky. This is reﬂ ected in existing lit-
erature on Australian Aboriginal Astronomy, which tends to focus on stories associated
with constellations, but with little emphasis on the deep intellectual co ntext in which
meaning is sought for astronomical phenomena.
The 50,000 year-old Aboriginal cultures are believed to be the oldest continuous cul-
tures in the world, and since the night sky seems to play an important role in them, it
is sometimes suggested (e.g. Haynes 1992) that Aboriginal Austra lians were the world’s
ﬁrst astronomers. But the word “astronomy” implies more than ju st stories – it means
a quest to understand the patterns in the sky, and the motion and eclipses of the Sun,
Moon, and planets. The goal of our research project is to unders tand the importance
of Astronomy in Aboriginal Cultures, and explore the depth of trad itional Aboriginal
astronomical knowledge.
The project has two key components. In some partsof Australia, such as Arnhem Land
in the north of Australia, Aboriginal cultures are ﬂourishing. For ex ample, Yolngu people
still maintain traditional aspects of their lifestyle, and continue to c onduct initiation
ceremonies, in which traditional knowledge is passed from generatio n to generation. The
ﬁrst thread of the project aims to record their stories and cerem onies, and as much of
the astronomical lore as might be told to an uninitiated white person.
In other parts of Australia, the Aboriginal culture was badly damag ed by the arrival
10Aboriginal Astronomy 11
of Europeans some 200 years ago. For example, the Aboriginal peo ple around Sydney
were decimated by introduced disease, exclusion from food and wat er, and deliberate
genocide. In these regions, little is known of the original culture of t he Aboriginal people,
but we can study it by examining their art and artefacts. Thus the s econd thread of
the project focuses on surveying and recording the rock engrav ings of the Sydney basin
region and the stone arrangements of Victoria.
Aboriginal astronomy was ﬁrst described by Stanbridge (1857), a nd subsequent im-
portant works include those by Mountford (1976), Haynes (1992 ), Johnson (1998), and
Cairns & Harney (2003). Most of these works focus on how object s in the night sky
represent events or characters in Dreaming stories, and only tou ch brieﬂy on practical
applications or on interpretation of the motion of the sky.
For example, the European constellation of Orion is called Djulpan in th e Yolngu
language. The three stars in Orion’s belt are three brothers who we re blown into the sky
by the Sun after one of them broke a taboo by eating a king-ﬁsh, wh ich was his totem
animal Wells (1973). They are seated in a canoe, with Betelgeuse mar king the front of
the canoe, and Rigel the back of the canoe. The Orion nebula is the ﬁ sh, and the stars of
Orion’s sword are the line still attached to the ﬁsh (Fig.2 - Left). Diﬀ erent stories about
Orion are found in other Aboriginal cultures, but are often associa ted with young men,
particularly those who are hunting or ﬁshing (e.g. Massola 1968).
Similarly, many groups across Australia (e.g. Massola 1968, Harney 1 959) tell how the
Pleiades are a group of sisters chased by the young men in Orion, whic h is very similar
to the traditional European myth about these constellations. Alth ough this similarity
between Aboriginal and European stories suggests early cultural contact between Abo-
riginal and European people, it is unlikely that such contact took plac e. It is more likely
that the Aboriginal people independently devised the stories in a sor t of cultural conver-
gent evolution, perhaps reﬂecting the fact that the massive brigh t stars of Orion follow
the beautiful little cluster of the Pleiades as the sky rotates.
2. Cultural Background
An impediment to this study is the misinformation permeating the litera ture, dat-
ing from an era when racial stereotypes were widespread even amo ngst academics. For
example, Blake (1981) states categorically “No Australian Aborigina l language has a
word for a number higher than four” and this belief is still widely encou ntered. However,
complex Aboriginal number systems have been well-documented in th e literature (e.g.
McRoberts 1990, Tully 1997), and Blake’s statement appears to re ﬂect a widely-held
post-colonial attitude to Aboriginal people which was widespread ﬁf ty years ago but is
now fortunately waning. However, such ingrained attitudes state equally misleadingly
that Aboriginal people “don’t measure things”, and so would not be in terested in or
capable of careful astronomical measurements. Rather than re lying on such assertions,
this project concentrates on exploring the available evidence.
3. Sun, Moon, and Eclipses
In most Aboriginal cultures, the Moon is male and the Sun is female. Fo r example,
the Yolngu people of Arnhem Land in the far north of Australia, tell h ow Walu, the
Sun-woman, lights a small ﬁre each morning, which we see as the dawn (Wells 1964).
She decorates herself with red ochre, some of which spills onto the c louds, creating the
red sunrise. She then lights her torch, made from a stringy-bark t ree, and travels across
the sky from east to west carrying her blazing torch, creating day light. On reaching the12 Norris & Hamacher
western horizon, she puts out her torch, and starts the long jou rney underground back
to the morning camp in the east. Thus the Yolngu people explained the daily motion of
the Sun across the sky and back again under the ground.
This raises the question of whether traditional Aboriginal people re garded the Earth
as being ﬂat, in which case the Moon would need to tunnel under the E arth, or whether
they regarded the Earth as being a ﬁnite body which the Sun might pa ss underneath.
Warner (1937) was told by a traditional Yolngu man that “the Sun go es clear around
the world”, and who illustrated this “by putting his hand over a box an d under it and
around again”.
The Yolngu people call the Moon Ngalindi and he too travelsacrossth e sky. Originally,
he was a fat lazy man (corresponding to the full Moon) for which he w as punished by
his wives, who chopped bits oﬀ him with their axes, producing the wanin g Moon (Wells
1964, Hulley 1996). He managed to escape by climbing a tall tree to fo llow the Sun, but
was mortally wounded, and died (the new Moon). After remaining dea d for three days,
he rose again, growing round and fat (the waxing Moon), until, afte r two weeks his wives
attacked him again. The cycle continues to repeat every month. Un til Ngalindi ﬁrst died,
everyone on Earth was immortal, but he cursed humans and animals s o that only he
could return to life. For everyone else, death would thereafter be ﬁnal.
But the Arnhem Land stories go much further, even explaining why t he Moon is
associated with tides, and in particular why Spring tides are associat ed with the Full
Moon and the New Moon. When the tides are high, water ﬁlls the Moon a s it rises. As
the water runs out of the Moon, the tides fall, leaving the Moon empt y for three days.
Then the tide rises once more, reﬁlling the Moon. So, although the me chanics are a little
unclear, the Yolngu people clearly had an excellent understanding of the motions of the
Moon, and its relationship to the tides.
The Warlpiri people explain a solar eclipse as being the Sun-woman being hidden by
the Moon-man as he makes love to her. On the other hand, a lunar ec lipse is caused
when the Moon-man is chased by the Sun-woman who is pursuing him, a nd eventually
catches-up. These two stories demonstrate an understanding t hat eclipses were caused by
the paths of the Sun and Moon across the sky, occasionally interse cting (Johnson 1998,
Warner 1937). This realisation is found in several other language gr oups. For example,
Bates(1944)recountedhow, during the solareclipse of1922,the Wirangupeople told her
that the eclipse wascaused by the Sun and Moon “becoming husband and wife together”.
These stories of eclipses are remarkable for two reasons. First, s olar eclipses are rare,
and a total solar eclipse is seen in any one location only once every thr ee or four gen-
erations. So for any group to have an explanation of solar eclipses im plies a remarkable
continuity of learning. For this myth to have been created, someon e must have seen an
eclipse, related it to a story passed to them from several generat ions previously, and then
strengthened and retold it for someone a few generations later.
Secondly, to relate a lunar eclipse to the paths of the Sun and Moon im plies a re-
markable intellectual feat of visualisation of their motion. At a lunar e clipse, the Sun,
Earth, and Moon are in a line, with the Earth between the Sun and the Moon. It is an
impressive intellectual feat, given that the Sun and Moon are diamet rically opposed, to
reason that it is precisely this alignment which has caused the eclipse.
Amongst thousands of beautiful rock engravings in Ku-ring-gai C hase National Park,
just north of Sydney, are a number of crescent shapes, such as that shown in Fig.1
(Left). Archaeologists (e.g. McCarthy 1983) have traditionally re ferred to these shapes
as boomerangs. However, a detailed study (Norris & Hamacher 200 9) has shown that
these shapes are more likely to represent crescent moons than bo omerangs. For example,
boomerangs usually have two straight lengths rather than a single c urved crescent, andAboriginal Astronomy 13
Figure 1. (Left) A rock engraving showing a crescent. (Right) A rock en graving of a man and
woman reaching up to a crescent. Could this represent an ecli pse?
rarely have pointed ends. Furthermore, it is unclear why a man and w oman should reach
up towards a boomerang in the sky. But if these shapes are moons, then why is the
moon shown with the two horns pointing down, since that conﬁgurat ion is seen only in
the afternoon or morning when the Sun is already high in the sky, and the moon barely
visible?
One answer is that it might depict an eclipse. In Fig.1 (Right), the man stands in
front of the woman, partly obscuring her. Such carefully-drawn o bscurations are unusual
in these rock carvings, and in this case may well represent the Moon -man obscuring the
Sun-woman during a solar eclipse.
4. The Calendar
Aboriginal calendars tend to be more complex than European calend ars, and those in
the north of Australia are often based on six seasons. Some Aborig inal groups mark them
in terms of the stars which appear during these seasons. For exam ple, the Pitjantjatjara
people say that the rising of the Pleiades in the dawn sky in May heralds the start of
winter (Clarke 2003). Perhaps even more importantly, the heliacal rising of a star or con-
stellation can tell people when it’s time to move to a new food source. F or example, when
the Mallee-fowl constellation (Lyra) appears in March, the Booron g people of Victoria
know that the Mallee-fowl are about to build their nests, and when L yra disappears in
October, the eggs are laid and are ready to be collected (Stanbridg e 1857). Similarly, the
appearance of Scorpius told Yolngu people that the Macassan (Ind onesian) ﬁsherman
would soon arrive to ﬁsh for Trepang.
Close to the Southern Cross (a possum in a tree, according to the B oorong people) is a
dark cloud of interstellar dust, called the Coalsack by astronomers . To many groups, it’s
the head of the “Emu in the Sky”. The emu’s body stretches down to the left towards
Scorpius, dominating the southern Milky Way. In Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park is
an engraving of an emu, which appears to be oriented (Cairns 1996) to line up with the14 Norris & Hamacher
Figure 2. (Left) The canoe, Djulpan, in Orion. (Right) The emu in the sk y above her
engraving. c/circlecopyrtBarnaby Norris, 2007
Emu in the Sky, in the correct orientation, at just the time of year w hen real-life emus
are laying their eggs (Fig.2 - Right).
5. Morning and Evening Star
When the planet Venus appears in the sky as a Morning Star, Yolngu p eople call her
“Banumbirr”,andtellhowshecameacrosstheseafromtheeastin theDreaming,naming
and creating animals and lands as she crossed the shoreline, and con tinued travelling
westwards across the country, leaving as her legacy one of the “s onglines” which are
important in Aboriginal cultures, and to Aboriginal navigation.
In an important “Morning Star Ceremony”, earthly Yolngu people co mmunicate with
their ancestors living on Baralku, the island of the dead, with the help of Banumbirr
togetherwith a“MorningStar Pole”.The ceremonystartsat dusk and continues through
the night, reaching a climax when Banumbirr rises a few hours before dawn. She is said
to trail a faint rope behind her along which messages are sent, and w hich prevents her
from ever moving awayfrom the Sun. This faint line in the sky is probab ly zodiacal light,
which is caused by extraterrestrial dust in the plane of the solar sy stem.
The Morning Star ceremony tells us two important things. One is that Yolngu people
observed that Venus never strays far from the Sun, which they e xplain in terms of the
rope binding Venus to the island. The other is that the Morning-Star ceremony has to
be planned well in advance, since Venus rises before dawn only at cer tain times of the
year, which vary from year to year. So the Yolngu people also track the complex motion
of Venus well enough to predict when to hold the Morning Star Cerem ony.
Wells (1996,1973)tells acorrespondingstoryabout Djurrpun, th e EveningStar,which
she assumes also to be Venus. She relates how the appearance of t he Evening Star shortlyAboriginal Astronomy 15
after sunset tells the Yolngu people that its time to start gathering “rakai” which are the
corms of the lotus lily, and an important food-source for Yolngu peo ple. However, from
an astronomical perspective this story must be faulty, since the a ppearance of Venus as
an evening star does not occur at a particular time of year, but var ies across the seasons,
rendering it useless for this purpose. This puzzle was solved when on e of us (Norris 2008)
was told the story by the traditional custodian of this story, Math ulu Munyarryun. The
Evening Star in this context is not Venus, but the star Spica, which d oes indeed set just
after the Sun at the time of year when rakai nuts are ready for ha rvesting.
6. Comets, Meteors and Cosmic Impacts
Amongst the Dreaming stories of various Aboriginal groups, there are many diﬀerent
views of comets and meteors. In a universe that seems ordered an d predictable, transient
events such as comets and meteors were often seen with fear and apprehension. As a
result, comets and meteors are frequently associated with omens , death, and evil. The
Tiwi of Bathurst and Melville Islands (Mountford 1958) and the Kunin jku of Arnhem
Land (Taylor 1996) saw meteors as the ﬁery eyes of evil spirit being s who raced across
the sky, hunting for the souls of the sick and dying. When children fr om the Ooldea
Region of South Australia saw a meteor (which they called a “devil-dev il”), they would
chant “Kandanga daruarungu manangga gilbanga ” which means “ star falling at night
time go back! ” (Harney & Elkin 1949). The Ngarrindjeri of South Australia told of a
being named Kulda who would manifest as a meteor emerging from the S outhern Cross,
warning the people of a disease epidemic. This led the people to shout, “peika baki ”,
meaning “ death is coming ” (Tindale 1933/34). The arrival of the Great Comet of 1843
caused fear among the Ngarrindjeri and was seen as a harbinger o f calamity (Eyre 1845).
These views are shared by peoples throughout the world (e.g. Fraz er 1930, Hamacher &
Norris 2009).
Occasionally, one of these falling stars actually crashes to earth. T here are many Abo-
riginalstoriesthatdescribesuchanevent,includingthe Arrernte storyaboutthecreation
of Tnorala, or Gosse’s Bluﬀ, an impact crater created nearly 150 millio n years ago. In the
Dreaming, a group of sky-women took the form of stars and dance d in the Milky Way.
One of the women grew tired and placed her baby in a wooden basket, called a turna.
As the women continued dancing, the turna fell over the edge and p lunged to earth. The
baby fell and was covered by the turna. The impact forced the roc ks upward, forming
the walls of the circular structure. The baby’s mother, the evening star, and father, the
morning star, continue to search for their baby to this day (Cauch i 2003, Williams 2004).
A Yolngu story from Arnhem Land tells of Goorda, a lonely ﬁre spirit th at lived in the
Southern Cross,who came to earthas a meteor to bring ﬁre to the people. Upon touching
the ground near the Gainmaui River, he accidentally caused massive ﬁres that brought
death and destruction to the people (Allen 1975). Various Dreaming stories from across
Australia tell about falling stars that bring ﬁre to the earth (e.g. Pe ck 1933, Berndt &
Berndt 1988,Jones 1989).Perhapssome of these storiesrecor dmeteorite falls and cosmic
impacts that remain unknown to Western science? Hopefully, furth er research will tell.
7. Astronomical Measurements
Having established that traditional Aboriginal cultures embodied a d eep interest in
the motion of heavenly bodies, can we ﬁnd any evidence to support t he “Stonehenge
hypothesis” that careful observations were made, records kep t, or structures set up to
point to the rising and setting places of heavenly bodies?16 Norris & Hamacher
A prime example is the Wurdi Youang stone arrangement in Victoria, w hich was built
by the Wathaurung people before European settlement. This egg- shaped ring of stones,
about 50m in diameter, has its major axis almost exactly East-West. At its Western
end, at the highest point of the circle, are three prominent waist-h igh stones. Morieson
(2003) pointed out that some outlying stones to the West of the cir cle, as viewed from
these three stones, seem to indicate the setting positions of the S un at the equinoxes and
solstices. Norris et al (2009) have conﬁrmed these alignments and have shown that the
straight sides of the circle also indicate the solstices (Fig.3).
Figure 3. The view across the Wurdi Youang stone circle, showing the po sitions of the setting
sun at the solstices and equinox. Lower part of the composite c/circlecopyrtJohn Morieson.
However, a sceptic might still raise some doubts. First, the outliers are only accurate
to a few degrees - could these alignments have occurred by chance ? Second, although
the stones of the circle are large and immovable, the outliers are sma ll and could have
been moved. Third, besides the outliers indicating the solstices and e quinox, there is an
additional outlier whose signiﬁcance is unclear. The best way to addr ess these doubts
would be to ﬁnd another site with astronomical alignments. Other st one arrangements
in Victoria also indicate the cardinal points, from which we may conclud e that the local
Aboriginal people knew these directions with some precision, presum ably by observing
celestial bodies. But are there other sites which point to the positio n of the solstices?
The search continues.
8. Conclusion
There is a growing body of evidence that traditional Aboriginal peop le were deeply
fascinated by the sky, and the motion of the bodies within it, and had a far richer and
deeper knowledge of the sky than is usually appreciated. However, while the evidence for
actual measurements or records is suggestive, it remains unprov en, although the clues
are suﬃciently tantalising to fuel the search for more evidence.
9. Acknowledgement
This project is dedicated to the hundreds of thousands of Indigen ous Australians who
lost their lives after the British occupation of Australia in 1788. We es pecially thank the
eldersandpeopleoftheYolngucommunityatYirrkala,NT,fortheirh elp andhospitality,Aboriginal Astronomy 17
andfortheirpermissiontodiscussaspectsoftheirculturein ourpu blications.We arealso
grateful to the other Indigenous groups who have welcomed us on to their land. We also
thank Barnaby Norris and Cilla Norris, who helped with much of the res earch described
here, and our colleagues Hugh Cairns, John Clegg, Paul Curnow, Kr istina Everett, and
John Morieson for their help and collaboration.
References
Allen, L.A., 1975, Time Before Morning , (Thomas Y. Crowell Co., New York)
Basedow, H., 1925, The Australian Aboriginal , (F. W. Preece & Sons, Adelaide)
Bates, D., 1944, The Passing of the Aborigines , (John Murray, London)
Berndt, R.M. & Berndt, C.H., 1988, The Speaking Land , (Penguin Books Australia Ltd.)
Blake, B.J., 1981, Australian Aboriginal Languages , (Angus & Robertson, London)
Cairns, H., 1996, Sydney Rock Carvings & Astronomy , unpublished manuscript
Cairns, H. & Yidumduma Harney, B., 2003, Dark Sparklers , Published by Hugh Cairns, Sydney
Cauchi, S., 2003, “Outer space meets outback and a bluﬀ is bor n”,The Age , 18 June 2003,
http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2003/06/17/105582 8328658.html
Clarke, P.A., 2003, Where the Ancestors Walked , (Allen & Unwin, Crows Nest, NSW, Australia)
Eyre, E.J., 1845, Journ. of Expeditions of Disc. Into Central Australia, Vol 2 , (Boone, London)
Frazer, J.G., 1930, The Golden Bough: Part III, 3rdEd., (Macmillan & Company, Ltd., London)
Hamacher, D.W. & Norris, R.P., 2009, Archaeoastronomy , (submitted)
Harney, B., 1959, Tales from the Aborigines , (Rigby, Adelaide)
Harney, W. E. and Elkin, A. P., 1949, Songs of the Songmen , (F.W. Cheshire, Melbourne)
Haynes,R.D., 1992, Aboriginal Astronomy, Australian Journal of Astronomy , Vol. 4, pp.127-140
Hulley, C.E., 1996, Dreamtime Moon , (Reed Books, Chatswood, NSW)
Johnson, D., 1998, Night skies of Aboriginal Australia: a noctuary , Oceania Mon. 47 (Sydney)
Jones, E., 1989, The Story of the Falling Star , (Aboriginal Studies Press, Canberra)
Massola, A., 1968, Bunjil’s Cave , (Lansdowne Press, Melbourne)
McCarthy, F.D., 1983, Catalogue of Rock Engravings in the Sydney-Hawkesbury Dist rict, (New
South Wales National Parks and Wildlife Service, Sydney)
McNight, D., 2005, Of marriage, violence and sorcery , (Ashgate Pub. Ltd., Surry, UK)
McRoberts, R.W., 1990, Counting at Pularumpi , Library of the Australian Institute of Aborig-
inal and Torres Strait Islanders Studies (Canberra)
Morieson, J., 2003, Solar-based Lithic Design in Victoria, Australia, in World Archaeological
Congress , Washington D.C.
Mountford, C.P., 1958, The Tiwi (Phoenix House, Ltd., London)
Mountford, C.P., 1976, Nomads of the Australian Desert , (Rigby, Ltd., Adelaide)
Norris, R.P., 2008, “Star Dreaming in Arnhem Land”, Cosmos, Issue 20 (April/May), pp. 20-24
Norris, R.P. & Hamacher, D.W., 2009, Crescent moons in Sydney Rock Engravings , in prep.
Norris, R.P., Norris, P.M., & Hamacher, D.W., 2009, Wurdi Youang: An Australian Aboriginal
Stone Circle with solstitial indicators , in prep.
Peck, C.W., 1933, Australian Legends , (Lothian, Melbourne)
Stanbridge, W.E., 1857, On the astronomy and mythology of th e Aborigines of Victoria, Proc
of the Phil. Inst. of Vic. , Transactions 2, pp. 137-140
Taylor, L., 1996, Seeing the Inside (Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK)
Tindale, N. B., 1933/1934, Journal of the Researches in the South-East of South Austral ia, Vol
I, (Anthro. Archives, Museum of SA)
Tully, J., 1997, Dja Dja Wurrung Language of Central Victoria , privately published
Warner, W.L., 1937, A black civilization , (Harper, New York)
Wells, A.E., 1964, Skies of Arnhem land , (Angus & Robertson, Sydney)
Wells, A.E., 1973, Stars in the Sky , (Rigby, Ltd. Adelaide)
Williams, W.H., 2004, The Stories, The Songs, Clip 2: Falling from the sky , (CAAMA Produc-
tions documentary, Australia)