Try to get somewhere dark and look up.  I saw a big one at 7:20.   
Good timing. Just started raining in Sydney...Sydney always goes cloudy/rainy when this stuff happens
I’ve been staring up in the sky the next 20 minutes and only saw one more tiny one.  So it isn’t like fireworks out there….   Perhaps some hours later or even tomorrow night is better
and there's an aurora tonight as well!
I saw one up in Brissy! Super bright, very fast. About 6pm straight up near the pointer stars!
I'm in Western Australia, south of Perth and it's overcast and not dark yet. Bugger!
Freezing my ass off but skies are relatively clear now so I’m gonna sit outside for a while and watch. Will keep updated!
Just read this article


You can start watching the mighty meteor shower in Australia from about 9pm.
Word on the street is the highest number of meteors will take off from 11pm until 3am, which is convenient if you already plan on being awake for the Olympics.


https://www.pedestrian.tv/astrology/meteor-shower-australia/
Took a break.   Went out again at 10 pm and then you see one about once every 5 or 10 minutes.   Just look up.  I’m in Melbourne so the sky is clear.  I’m in the middle suburbs so the light pollution is bad but you still see the.  If I was in a rural area I would see way more
And its raining
It’s still happening right now guys
beatiful
Perth nor. Also cloud cover. 😟
Ooh I just got in from trying to spot the aurora and now I’ll have to go back out again in an hour!
Anyone know which direction I should be looking in Sydney??
Yeah.  I saw a different one but did see by looking straight up
UPDATE: saw one, it was bright. I am excited (and cold).
That article was written by someone who doesn't understand that Australia isn't just the area they can see around them, and given that they're an astrologer, they're not really all that good at understanding things anyway.
6 an hour is pretty average in the evening with dark skies.  To get that many in a light-polluted city sounds like a shower.
I think just look straight up.
Where are you located? Cause Sydney is cloudy af and I can't spot anything, lol.
Western Sydney. Just saw a second one!
Final update: clouds are rolling in so time to head inside and get warm. I had the most success looking South.
