Hello, my partner and I are thinking of renting a car from Sydney to Gold Coast and back. Is a small or mid sized hatch good enough or should we upgrade to SUV? 2 luggages only. Options are Corolla, i30 or SUV such as Sportage, RAV4. 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Corolla or i30 would be more than fine if you are just travelling along the highways and freeways. Cheaper on fuel also. You can fold the seats down if you need to fit the luggage (Corolla boot is pretty small unless you get the sedan version).
If you haven't got a lot of luggage and staying on sealed roads then a hatch is fine.
A small car is fine u less you want to sleep or go off the main and head into trails.

You do realise that’s a pretty big journey there and back within 7 days? Its a LOT of hours in the car.
I just rented a new hybrid corolla for a week, drove all around Perth area, maybe 600km all up. Barely used half a tank. Ridiculously easy to drive. Big enough for two people imo if you don't have heaps of stuff. I paid an extra $30 for the hybrid but definitely saved more on petrol. I'd go the corolla again for sure.

This post brought to you by the Toyota motor corporation (not really, but fuck you pay me Toyota!)
Corolla or an i30 would be plenty for driving on regular roads, get the hybrid Corolla if you can (unless it is massively expensive) - there are plenty of sections where you should do some regen and make it worthwhile.

The Corolla boot is small, you should fit your bags and the seats can fold down, but I prefer soft bags over hard suitcases. The i30 has much better bootspace.
Yes going to break it down to Sydney Byron GC then GC Port Macquarie Sydney
Was it sedan or hatch?
Hatch
How many luggages can it store
Probably 3-4 suitcases. I had two big bags, two backpacks a pram and car seat in there no problem
