
He drove to his wife's  house with a knife hidden in his pocket, and stabbed her 17 times to the neck and chest.

26 years isn't enough.. this c@#t should die in prison.
I reckon stabbing someone to death is ‘manifestly excessive’, but okay.
Has he tried…

…I don’t know…

…maybe...

#NOTFUCKINGMURDERINGSOMEONEINFRKNTOFTHEIRCHILDONCHRISTMASDAY?
They interviewed the daughter on 7:30 and it was a pretty gut-wrenching story.

She was in the car when Darren drove over to Rachel's house and he told her 'don't come down the driveway just wait, I'll be 30 seconds'. Then he comes back a few minutes later covered in blood and tells her 'call 000 I've just killed your mum'. Their son was in the house as well.

Tragically, their neighbours were another family where the mum was killed by her ex-partner. The daughters of the two households were incredible in their resilience.

All that to say, I don't think 26 years is "manifestly excessive" at all. If anything, it could be longer.
Leave him in prison until he is too frail to feed himself.
17 times - that's excessive, but nothing, absolutely nothing about 26 years in prison for doing it is excessive. May every one of those 9496 days be horrendous, you prick!
Gee, you don’t say! The dude MURDERED someone; who gives a flying what he thinks? 

Why are we giving air to evil people, and those who don’t learn from their actions? I’m so over the outrage bait, Jesus Christ.
He’s claiming he’s remorseful. This isn’t what someone who’s remorseful does. If he was remorseful, he’d accept responsibility and the prison term that goes with it. That’s how you make reparations for what you’ve done, not that anything could make up for it. Instead he’s trying to weasel his way out.
Pretty sure the opinion of a murderer, on the subject of sentence length for murder, is the only opinion that does not matter.
Should be doubled just for the appeal
Manifestly inadequate.
A 17 year non-parole period is not exactly on the heavy end for murder? Not to mention what he put his autistic son through, being in the home during the attack… on fucking Christmas?! 

Scum.
She has no years. The idea that you can be released and still have some freedom is manifestly better than being dead.

Ludicrous
Fair enough too. How about we change his sentence. He is free to go as soon as Rachel Wake takes her next unassisted steps.
Any sentence less than "feet first into the woodchipper" is too lenient.
How do you argue that any amount of prison time is "too much" when you intentionally took away someone's whole life? You would have to argue that their life is worth less than yours, which I'm sure he does believe, but saying that shit out loud is a bold move.
Wait, that's a 26 year head sentence? I was thinking 26 years to serve is a little high compared to murder sentences here in Qld, but cunt's only doing a minimum of 17 years. Fuck that, why didn't he get life?
Grub
just another murderous whiney dog cunt that can stay locked up for the rest their life like the cuntstick from hoddle street who technically has completed his sentence but theres no paroleboard in the country that will let that murderous fuck walk free ever again
What’s worse is that his daughter drove them there, and she had no clue what he was going to do. Poor kids.
While his kids were there.  Ruined Christmas for them forever.  
sentencing in this country is so weak. 26 years is a joke for an act that should be, if not close to, life imprisonment.
If ever in doubt, apply the above to every day.
You mis-spelled "should" in your last sentence.
Then force him exist back in the real world and have to navigate the nightmare that is aged care all alone
17 years with parole and probably less if he gets let out early on compassionate grounds when he plays the feeble old man card. We really need more "never ever seeing daylight ever again" sentences instead of this namby pamby bullshit. 
Clicks
BUT HE'S SAD ABOUT IT (now that he is finding out)
Him and his lawyer are the two people who should be given the absolute least amount of weight when the period of incarceration is determined.
That was my first thought
that is too lenient as its too quick, should be flayed alived and rolled down a hill of salt every single day for rest of his life so he has to deal with just a tiny fraction of the pain those kid have to live with.
Not to mention the cruelty towards his own children.
For context, one of the murderers I met in prison is doing 20+ years to serve (I can't remember the exact number) with a lifetime parole for shooting the cabbie who raped his wife.
And everyday ending in y for the rest of their lives.
Check out the Dutch volleyball player and you'll feel a little better about Australian sentences 
Noticed that as well.
I feel like aged care in prison would be worse. Surely....
Non-parole period of 17 years, he is not getting a parole hearing before for a pre-med violent murder, no matter how well he behaves. If he survives the 17 years he will be 77 - he is not getting out in anything, other than a pine suit.
R/Dontstickyourclickinthat
omg, that one makes my blood boil.
