
SpaceX hopes to tow ships to Australia after soft splashdowns in the short term. This will allow them to test a post-reentry vehicle, but first they need an Australian government agreement and US export controls to be relaxed. This may be the start of an Australian Starship launch/catch system, sources said.
Something from Elon? Fuck him.
I wish them luck. Australia has a huge NIMBY population. They'll try and prevent something from happening even if it benefits them.
I am really interested to see how Rocketlabs new Neutron rocket will compete with falcon9. Rocketlab are the only ones seemingly anywhere close to competing with spacex as blue origin have yet to actually prove allot of their capabilities
I find the whole talk of a long term thing amusing. The entire point of what SpaceX is building is to make it have a rapid reusable turnaround. To do so, the orbiter has to land at the launch site.  


There's going to be big benifits for SpaceX to land the orbiter in the Indian ocean and then recover it for study. But that will probably only be for a handful of flights, because once they get enough info they'll start landing them back at the launch pad. There's zero long term there. It'll never be part of standard operating procedures.


Now, could they build a launchpad and launch them from here? Totally. (And that would be awesome). But it'll be on the east coast, probably Queensland, and not the west coast as is happening here with this recovery. so apart from building relationships this won't have anything beneficial for that. Also, it'll be a multi year investment to build the infrastructure for it, beyond just the launchpad I don't think we have the supply of liquid oxygen. (Plenty of gas in Queensland at least)
Elon's a twat but SpaceX is one of the most beneficial companies that exists right now. We should be supporting it.
> They'll try and prevent something from happening even if it benefits them


Totally understandable.  Making people do good things doesn't give you the same sense of power as making people do things they hate.
Well we are but only as a launch pad. All tech is protected and not shared with Australia 

Doubt Aussies will be employed. 

https://www.inverelltimes.com.au/story/8713395/agreement-clears-the-way-for-spacex-aussie-blast-off/
Maybe we can negotiate a special price for all Aussies to get a 50% cut on the price of the Tesla battery system. I am sure the Solar invested Nimby's will agree wholeheartedly.

I really don't know why the politicians don't chase him to make  Australia a Tesla premium launch country. It would generate a massive momentum for our own home grown space industry. Sorry I forgot, our country does not have industry policies, we only have handouts  and tax dodges.
After the shit they are pulling with the launch site I expect them to try recover in the great barrier reef and fuck it.
How is spacex beneficial?  Burning thousands of tonnes of fossil fuels per launch of which they plan hundredsper year, littering the world's oceans with debris, ejecting water vapour to the upper atmosphere where it will remain forever, creating a source of toxic combusted metal ash to remain forever in the upper atmosphere where it could be worse than cfc's on the ozone layer and may affect the earth's magnetic field, millions of tonnes of carbon pollution from their manufacturing facilities as well as methane leaks from fuel production, transport and storage as well as soot entering the upper atmosphere. For all the progress being made in terms of reducing greenhouse emissions, environmental waste and forever pollutants, companies like SpaceX actually plan to ramp up the damage they do by hundreds of times. All for a rich cunt's ego
Tesla and SpaceX are totally different companies.
“The shit they are pulling”?  I’m guessing the mainstream media has been posting some weird shit.
If you think that space travel (historically mostly in the form of satellites) hasn't been enormously economically beneficial then I have news for you.

Elon Musk's stated goal with SpaceX is to put humans on Mars, and I don't particularly care about that, nor do I put too much stock in anything Musk says. But I am very willing to believe that SpaceX will dramatically reduce the cost of launching things into space with Starship (they already have to an extent with falcon 9) which could have incredible ramifications down the line as the cost of launch is by far the limiting factor for putting almost everything is space. With a signficant reduction in launch cost the overall cost of satellites plummets.

If you care for the environment, you probably want ways to study climate change. Well, satellites are crucial for understanding and modeling the earth's atmosphere and more that will be incredibly important in the fight against cilmate change.

There's also the long-term prospect of opening up genuine mining (asteroids most likely) or manufacturing in space, which unlocks material resources that, again, would be incredibly valuable to anyone who wants to protect the climate. The nice thing about mining asteroids is that there's no living beings you're going to effect. 

> Burning thousands of tonnes of fossil fuels per launch of which they plan hundredsper year

Fortunately, the rocket industry is already moving away from dirtier fuels like kerosene towards cleaner fuels like methalox (some co2 and water is released)

> littering the world's oceans with debris
Again, the future of the space industry is undoubtedly reusable rockets so this will be a much less signficant issue than it currently is.

> as methane leaks from fuel production

Methane leaks also cost money. There is no future where we massively scale up rocket launches without fixing this issue.

> All for a rich cunt's ego 

I don't disagree that Elon is a bit of a cunt, but whether it's from his influence or other people at the company, SpaceX is still doing incredible things.
