
I would not blame him for running. He was outgunned and could not really do much except be another casualty. 


This is real life people, not TV or the movies.
That was such stressful viewing, poor guy
It's not clear in this article, but according 4to an article in The Guardian he didn't know where the fourth officer (Keely) was. She ended up lying in the grass for 2 hours whispering to a triple zero operator while the grass fire caused by the Trains setting the police cars on fire crept towards her.
'Fled' makes it sound like cowardice which it definitely was not.
Crazy. Glad he got outta there alive.
Holy fuck that is so intense.
Fucking horrifying. Absolutely insane footage. Can't imagine what the poor guy went through and is no doubt still going through. It's crazy how calm both he and his sergeant were on the phone. Did a phenomenal job keeping their shit together in the circumstances. 

Hopefully the inquest can come up with recommendations that will help minimise the chances of this sort of thing happening in future.
I can’t even begin to imagine how horrific it would have been to go through that. I’m so glad he and Constable Keely Brough were able to escape.

Rest in peace, Constable Rachel McCrow, Constable Matthew Arnold, and Alan Dare.
That cunt Gareth had been waiting his whole life for an excuse to hunt people 
The vehicle chiming about the fucking seatbelt at the end of that body cam, my word.
It’s incredibly how he remained that calm and level headed in such a horrific situation.
How the fuck did he survive that? The shots at the end right at him through the windscreen jesus
No effective cover, what amounts as a spud gun against a rifle at range he didn't have a choice but to break contact. Thing is he could have been killed when he paused at the side of the police vehicle exposed to fire. He was lucky and there was fuck all else he could have done.
Kirk was as cool as a cucumber. Legend.
Fuck you abc for another clickbait headline implying he's a coward
 he ran when the two other officers were shot dead. What a dogshit title.  
I would have run as well. Unless your in that situation you can't say what you would do. Hope he's ok
I don’t know how much ammo a Queensland copper rolls around with but I’ll say it’s at least several magazines short of what’s needed to suppress that incoming. No hope of moving under fire towards his oppo, and even less to approach the target. 

Retreat ≠ running away
Rest in peace officers and the neighbor.

And f*ck religious extremists, may they rott in hell.
I understand this needs to be played in court, but this footage should never be made it to the media. We (the piblic) don't need to see this absolutely horrific footage..
[deleted]
I wonder if donut will do a vid on this one.
If he didn't run then he was dead, unless his pistol skills were marksman level and luck was phenomenal; 3v1 - nope. And he waited until he was directed to leave. Guy is a champ!
A glock feels like a toy compared to a long arm.
Glock vs incoming is a gtfo moment. Even a SAS cat would nope out there with a sidearm.
Oh I just can't help but think "fucking anti vaxxer conspiracy theorists" watching this whole thing. I know it's wrong... Can't help it though.
He stayed pretty calm, considering the situation
The fear she must have felt. Fk
Yeah, I feel "retreated to safety" would have been a kinder phrase for the headline. Don't think it was the intent of the writer in any way but it definitely does bring to mind an act of cowardice.
Yeah "moments he got away from the shooters" tells the same story but without the negative connotations.
Yeah, they were pinned down and completely outgunned.
Honestly anything other than cowardice in that situation would be stupid.
Holly fuck mate you weren’t joking. Actions movies can eat shit, knowing shits real, this is so much more intense…

The calm and collected as much as one can be. It’s crazy….
I remember seeing footage of an old woman in a car on a level crossing in Austria (?). As I understand she failed to get out of the way of the train and died because the car would not go into gear, because the seatbelt must be buckled to permit the car to go into gear. 

I’d hope a cop car would get such dumb features disabled?  Withdrawal under fire is much higher priority than the extra seconds to belt up.
Agreed. Fled is a disgusting word to use. You can hear them firing at him as he runs to the vehicle.
Correct, and he did return fire before one of the down officers was executed, realistically there’s nothing he could have done other than run into open ground and be killed like his colleagues.
Most Australian police officers have a full magazine in the gun and one more on the belt. About 30 rounds total. Plus anything beyond about 20 metres would be a very difficult shot with a Glock pistol when you're under extreme stress, unless you're ex military or a competition shooter or something like that.
No, I disagree. There's too much of a tendency to laugh off cookers as a harmless joke. The public needs reminding that they are dangerous.
Although it’s a very difficult watch, the public honestly needs a solid reminder of what our police officers’ experiences are on the job, and the sacrifices they make to maintain public safety. I see a lot of disrespect for police on Australian Reddit subs and in the general media, I hope some opinions will be changed with a harsh dose of reality
It definitely needs to be shown. We live with these people, work with them, interact with them in public and share our world with them. We need to know what they are capable of and the kind of people police interact with on a day to day basis. Yeah it rarely results in this, but its generally with bad people. 
how much are you getting paid by the Ministry of eSafety to say that?
I get your point but they were literally gunned down. I don’t see that phrase as inspiring sympathy
I don't think it makes it sound like that.
No.
It's a bit of overuse of passive language I'm guessing. Normally journos try to avoid assigning blame to an event as they don't normally have absolute proof.
I don’t really give a fuck to be honest. Everyone knows what happened.
Does he take suggestions? I’ve seen some of his content in the past and thought he had interesting insights
Yep. But there would be a few who would only remember some hero cop with plot armour and infinite bullets taking out a squad of specially trained mercenaries with a glock from 1000m.
It's not wrong to think to like that. It is the rabbit hole entry point for people with often traumatic pasts with a big neon sign out the front that says " this will make it make sense". And sometimes ends with people being murdered.
You are wrong.  Critical thought is always important and required.  Some people take it too far, like some people take religion too far, or weight loss too far, or plastic surgery too far.
Two other officers down, the shooters have his position, they have rifles and he has a handgun. He's lucky to be alive. If they were better shots it'd have been very different.


He kept his head and got away. Best he could do really. 
Yep agreed. He didn't "flee". He tactically disengaged. It was his only tactical option at that point and doing anything else would have led to more innocent deaths and less real time information. 
“Retreat under fire” is a way to phrase it and both a realistic description and tactically sound.
The point is that it’s not “cowardice”, but just rational. It’s not automatically cowardice to retreat
No it isn't. It's accurate. All rational people would flee in that situation.
I think you are the one making a value judgement on the word "fled" here, not the journalist. It's the most succinct verb that accurately describes what happened. What's wrong with describing it as fleeing anyway? He had just watched one of them execute his colleague at point blank range, they were actively shooting at him, and his superior was telling him to run. He fled, I can't think of any other word that would make sense.
Sovereign citizens are labeled as domestic terrorists by the FBI, we need the same type of definition here so that our Police can take the same pre cautions as they would with any other domestic terrorist.

Police deal with these people daily, often without any insight into just how dangerous and psychotic they can be.
My one hope for this awful incident is that we'll stop looking at sovereign citizens and conspiracy theorists as quirky harmless little weirdos, and realise that some of them are pretty much domestic terrorists.
100%. It’s very disturbing stuff, but lots of there radicalisation seems to have occurred through online conspiracies, which in their mind justified executing two people in their 20s who never stood a chance. It is scary what the proliferation of these sick beliefs can do. These people are freaks and this ideology is seemingly on the risk here.
>the public honestly needs a solid reminder of what our police officers’ experiences are on the job, and the sacrifices they make to maintain public safety.

Be real, this is not the experience of 99.9999% of Australian police officers. Hardly anyone will experience anything as horrific as what these police did. They didn't expect anything like that either, that's why there's a 5-week coronial inquest being held.
Just found the Sov Cit in the comments. Thought I could smell the aluminium.
Such a weird comment
[deleted]
They were killed in a firefight with police officiers, they were't "gunned down" 

Are the ABC trying to martyr some cookers?
I've no idea? Maybe if you ping him on xtwitter?
Cop has what? Two mags? That’s Winchester before you can even move. Pop 5-6 rounds in direction of fire and call in big hitters. Adding another crying mum for a posthumous gong is not worth it.

I remember when I did the RAN boarding party course and if it got hot the whole thing was get back in the RHIB and light it up with the 50 or Typhoon.
God botherer, skinny, bad boob job, cop killer <-- one of these people is not like the other.
ya, staying for some kind of heroic gunfight isnt bravery, its stupidity.
Sure most officers won’t have this exact 
experience, but EVERY SINGLE POLICE OFFICER will be forced to face violent offenders armed with guns or weapons with intent to harm them during their working life. We should all be grateful that they do this job in order to keep our communities safe.
Ehh needless semantics

Saying gunned down sounds almost better to me because it emphasises the end they deserved
Both sides were gunned down (shot) in a gun fight (the act of shooting)
>following a six hour siege with specialist police.

In Aus, and especially in Aus media, anyone in a siege with police is not portrayed as the good guy.
They, like other journo's, went to the same school of limited words to describe anything.

For example, every time someone disagrees with someone its 'slammed' or 'slams'. Its lazy writing, but what do we expect, we don't value journalism, and have let news outlets cut their news rooms to the bone.
Maybe stick to ACA mate
Just to be clear, we're saying the same thing, but why do I get a feeling you think I was saying otherwise.
I don't think people that haven't been in a situation like this can make that judgement. If you'd just watched two of your friends get shot would you still think it stupid to stay and fight regardless of the odds?
Some might even say pedantic semantics
Yet they were “gunned down” not killed following a gun fight
Stop shining a light on the limited phrases journalists use.

In their defence try writing a bushfire story without repeating the word fire
> we don't value journalism

It’s no longer valued because it was failing, it’s not failing because it is no longer valued.
Nah agreeing and expanding! Providing context to a wider audience and all that
It’s often better to make a tactical withdrawal and regroup/prepare than it is to fight a losing battle. Running into a meat grinder just makes you another casualty, which is pointless and adds further strain to your team. Rationality and a cool head are key factors in combat.
The semantics of a man in the mood for an internet argument
This isn't the battle you're looking for.
I really, really think you’re overthinking that one phrase chief.
And you're the only one reading that as a negative or anything other than a description of what occurred. They were "gunned down". Shot to death. It's what happened. You're the one putting more meaning behind it than exists. Absolutely nobody in the Australian media is trying to garner sympathy for cooker scum that murdered two police officers in cold blood. You're just wrong. It's fine.
Try it the other way. Write a story about how hot it got on Bondi Beach on Boxing Day without using the word "soared".
Hey, I'm okay with using words and phrases that have little substitute, but surely someone can scrounge up a thesaurus for some synonyms.
Yeah, no doubt there. 2 of his team are dead, 1 mia at this point. Would you have called him stupid if he'd made the other choice and decided to stay and potentially help save a third victim from being killed? I'm saying neither choice is stupid. Im not arguing which has more of a tactical advantage.
I'll fight you on that
holy shit cookers out in force, it went from being in the positive to like -14 in a minute
Firefighters fight a bushfire
> would you have called him stupid if he'd made the other choice and decided to stay and potentially help save a third victim from being killed?

If it prevented the third guy from being killed then sure; If it didn't I'd probably still consider it "stupid", I wouldn't say it out loud though because I don't think he "deserves" death for making a stupid decision or anything.
Mate, you’re the cooker. You’re starting a fight about something you’re wrong about, don’t understand and are completely obsessed with. That’s pretty spot on cooker behaviour, mate
