
To keep your details safe please provide us with additional data.
More and more data collection.... That's all they are after.   
They want to know everything you do so they can milk you for more $$
Put your local real estate’s number
/r/assholedesign
They are currently locking out next week's catalogue preview as an enticer for people to log in or create accounts. That way people are one step closer to buying stuff online when they look through the online catalogue.
it's 10pm on a Tuesday and the specials come out in 2 hrs and it's asking me to log-in and verify my account just to be able to view a damn catalogue of stuff that is going on special in 2 hrs.




WTF is Coles doing? 
It’s been like this for at least a few weeks now in Adelaide- needless to say couldn’t be fucked
The Coles app is total shit. Have to sign in again to see my past orders 🙄
Yeah nah

Can't be fucked with that
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=au.catalogueoffers.app

Tim Tams are half price. If that's your thing 😄
[https://quackr.io/](https://quackr.io/)

Temp numbers to use for these cases.
Coles are shit.  Also, the sky is blue
Is that to view next week's catalogue? It works fine for me when you view this week's catalogue.
I’m torn between posting this and gatekeeping it for myself but … it doesn’t actually require authentication, just some cookie from their authentication flow.

What I’ve done previously is go to the login screen, then click back to the catalog page - I think it’s dumb enough to think that because you just came from the login page, you must be logged in and lets you view the catalog
Reminds me of the Victorian Electoral SMSs asking you to check your details and the whole thing looks and sounds like every other scam text you get.
Just use a fake number
$5 sim from aldi in a spare phone for junk sign ups
The website is currently down. Could be related/a bug.
I swear at one point Woolworths, maybe a year ago, started doing this. But I guess they just stopped (a big enough drop in traffic?) because recently I've actually been able to search without being forced to make an account.
lol. your comment made me laugh.


even funnier when all I am trying to do is view the specials catalogue to see if cheese is on sale. 😂. Way OTT! 
And sell your data too. Flybuys data (aka you) is worth heaps to them
Have you thought about contacting your local member?
yes. next week's catalogue.. aka. the one starting tmrw. 
Fake phone number won't work.


Read the screenshot!




"Please CONFIRM your mobile number is correct, we'll send you a 1 time code"




to view the specials catalogue that comes out tmrw!! lol
Can you do a second number on your main phone using eSIM prepaid? I am sick to death of spam and everything else
The government isn't even making colesworth pay taxes, what makes you think they'll give the slightest of fucks about this


I also wonder if you're being sarcastic and I look like a doofus
Obligatory whoosh.
