
Wow the circle of life. Rex used former 737 from virgin now virgin flies Rex customers.
Trying to call the number as we’re due to fly out to Perth tomorrow night, not sure how we’re going to manage that now, call centre sounds very overloaded
Trying to rebook and it’s not working. Great.
Talk about a reverse Uno.

Rex starts 737 operations, gambling that Virgin will go bust. 

Virgin stepping in when the whole thing back fires, and Rex instead is that one that goes bust. 

A surprise to no one
Sad, there’s nothing wrong with their service either. Flew with them just this weekend. But the plane just wasn’t full. Only sold half or less of the seats.
Bizarre watching them all disappear off flight tracker.
Shit really? I'm supposed to be flying with them end of August. I haven't been notified or anything though? What should I be doing?
What's the root cause of this?
Is it just not profitable for them to run jets or have they been grounded for technical reasons?
Hopefully this means they'll remember that they also have regional flights they need to service instead of chasing the big dollars on the inter-city routes.

I've had so many delays and cancellations over the last 12 months that I switched back to Qantaslink.
Virgin with the flex. Your airline is failing even after selling tickets? DW we can give people flights for free.
Qantas & Jetstar have now also announced they will honour Rex flights between capital cities.
That's a shame. We really need a third carrier to hold the big two accountable.
Damn, a family member has just got a job piloting them.  Hopefully he won't be laid off.
Loopì
They seem to have cancelled their E190 flights between Perth and Adelaide as well.

This is such a disaster. Rex gambled on Virgin collapsing but obviously that didn't happen and there was too much competition for them to succeed. So they tried to offer lower fares, but they aren't very well known (I remember talking to some people that had paid like $400 for Perth-Melbourne on Qantas, they had no idea about Rex's $99 sale) and they weren't able to fill their planes and lost millions on their 737 services.

Airfares are so high in Australia that there's definitely room for a third carrier. If Rex was more well-known I'm confident that they would have been able to succeed with their 737 routes. But for now, they'll need to go back to their regional turboprop and I guess NJE E190 services.

I think that they could still make a comeback, but they could have to be more careful about it. They could fly E190s on underserved routes (I don't have any official data but maybe Gold Coast-Darwin, Canberra-Cairns, Melbourne-Alice Springs, etc.) and slowly make their way up to inter-capital routes. I feel like that has a chance of succeeding.
And is taking on the lease of 3 Rex aircraft, most of which came from Virgin, and are often operated by ex-VA crew members.

Virgin are also prioritising recruitment of Rex staff as they’re certified on the aircraft type.
Try Qantas or Jetstar - they are also honouring Rex flights
The VA call centre will struggle to manage this level of demand on top of normal customer enquiries. They haven’t had a lot of time to ramp up.
Yep same. Flight on Thursday, says to call Virgin to rebook and after 2 minutes of waiting just says the queue is too long and  hangs up. I filled in the request form anyway even though it says not to for flights within 48 hours.
Contact Virgin Australia by August 14 and they will rebook you for free. https://www.virginaustralia.com/au/en/forms/rex-rebooking-request/
My wife is supposed to be coming home tomorrow.

She's currently on the phone trying to figure out just how she's going to manage this.
Go to the Rex website there’s instructions and a form is on the Virgin website. You submit your Rex itinerary and VA accommodate you as best they can on the same day and time.
Check you’re email, I’m in the same boat as you. Virgin are going to honour the flights.
During COVID, Rex received around $150 million dollars from the Commonwealth to keep flying regional routes, etc. However they instead decided to start a jet operation, using (at the time) very very cheap 737 leases (mostly ex-Virgin planes) and based on their prediction Virgin would go broke - allowing Rex to walk in and be our number two domestic airline. 

Alas, the gamble didn't work, Virgin stayed in business and Rex had too much hubris to shut down jet ops when the costs went back to normal. And now here we are.
The jet operation was losing more than $1m a week.
They gambled on Virgin going bankrupt and picking up a lot of their passengers, so chose the 737 to be able to use existing Virgin pilots and crew and get a quick start. But Virgin didn't die, and the 737s ended up running at 60% load factors (and sometimes worse) on routes that Qantas are getting over 80% on.

What they needed was smaller, more efficient planes, but that would have cost more in leasing fees and crew training.
The 737s just weren't profitable.
Australia is a really big country with not many people in it. 

Flying big jets around is expensive and it costs more than customers are willing to pay to fly aforementioned big jets to really small places that not many people want to go to.
It’s free advertising - the original Virgin Blue did something similar when Ansett collapsed.
Also, Skytrans is getting some A320 family aircraft, for now it seems like they'll just be wet-leased to other carriers, but maybe they'll have some independent operations too.

Imagine if Rex decided to use Skytrans A319s for capital city routes that would be hilarious
At least so far it seems like NJE will still be flying E190s at least on some routes, they could possibly use those to  slowly expand their network and still offer some competition, I'm also not sure if they're getting rid of all their 737s but they probably are.
Saab or 737
Rex had a genuinely great product with their 737 services. I’m surprised (but also not) at the general ignorance of the public. Lots of people I’ve spoken to didn’t even know Rex did domestic flights to big cities. 

I think a majority of the general public immediately google ‘Qantas’ when booking flights, and don’t even shop around when Rex are offering the best service for price.
Pretty sure the whole Rex opspec for the 737 was just a copy and paste of Virgins. When I flew Rex everything from the wording of the announcements to the service delivery was identical to pre administration VA. Obviously couldn’t make a call on what was going on behind the cockpit door but wouldn’t be surprised if that was following the VA SOPs as well. 
Pretty sure there are 4 ex-VA planes left at REX.  VH-RQG was recently scrapped and VH-PAG was rumoured to be repo'd by lessors prior to the administration filings.  Two of the remaining ex-VA planes are over 20 years old, so that really only leaves 2 usable planes for lease if VA are trying to keep their fleet age down.

My guess is that VA will pick up the ex-Singapore 737s at REX.
Do you have the link for the request form? And yeah haha same flying out Thursday.
I submitted but I'm not sure I'm eligible 

Customers with bookings on the following routes will be eligible for this offer:

Sydney to Brisbane, Melbourne, Gold Coast and Adelaide
Melbourne to Brisbane, Hobart, Perth, Canberra, Gold Coast and Adelaide
Adelaide to Brisbane, Perth
Brisbane to Cairns

I'm flying Brisbane to Sydney. The return trip is offered. I hope I'm just misinterpreting and "Sydney to Brisbane" includes Brisbane to Sydney
Thank you for sending this through though, super appreciated
No email or anything yet.
No, that's not the case at all. They were flying their 737s on routes where hundreds of people flew every day and their fares were usually lower than Virgin and Qantas, between capital cities and not to really small places. But the issue was that they weren't able to fill their planes, I'm assuming because most people have never heard of them, and so they couldn't generate enough revenue to make their jet operations profitable.
Closest thing to this would be Alliance’s E190 network. Only issue is that it’s almost entirely leased out to Qantaslink.
Actually, I got it wrong. It's Saab.
Yeah exactly!! People are saying that there isn't demand for a third carrier in Australia but there definitely is, as long as everyone actually knows about them lol

I never got to fly them, it's very sad
Their product was great - service was better than either Qantas or Virgin and similarly priced. Their business class was superior to Qantas or Virgin except for the lounges, but at the prices they were charging it was hard to care. 

Was supposed to be flying to Brisbane with them on Friday, so will need to re-book.
Makes perfect sense. I work in analytical testing (food and water safety etc.) which I imagine shares similarly strict auditing standards. Validation of SOPs and test methods with NATA, TGA etc. is extremely time-consuming and expensive. No point redoing all that work if you don't need to!
Well not quite, they did give free bags and snacks too.
https://www.virginaustralia.com/au/en/forms/rex-rebooking-request/
Yeah I'm in a similar boat for Bris to Melb and then Syd to Bris in early September. I too am hoping that 

"Sydney to Brisbane, Melbourne, Gold Coast and Adelaide

Melbourne to Brisbane, Hobart, Perth, Canberra, Gold Coast and Adelaide

Adelaide to Brisbane, Perth

Brisbane to Cairns"

Also involves the opposite direction flights.
Ahh damn hopefully you’ll get one soon. I’m having the same worries (flying the same route Bris to Sydney) that it might not get rebooked.
I think the issue was the timetable which was pretty inconvenient for anyone with a normal 9-5. They got left with the worst slots that the big players weren't hoarding.
That is precisely the point I am making
Yep, Airnorth also has a small E190 fleet leased from Alliance but I'm not sure if their business model would work for Rex since Airnorth is just focused on NT. But there is definitely a place for Rex in the market, if not on Golden Triangle routes. They could probably make Gold Coast-Darwin work, maybe Hobart-Canberra and Adelaide-Uluru... eventually as they build a strong network in smaller cities they could start flying routes like Perth-Broome, Adelaide-Gold Coast, Canberra-Darwin and make them work with connections, maybe they could codeshare with some of the regional carriers, slowly working their way up...
Which VA did prior to administration. 
Thanks mate
Did you have any luck with rebooking?
Yeah, just the text message cancellation. I've contacted virgin, I hope they sort things out quickly
Yeah especially for Perth it was for aircraft utilization, that way they could fly to Perth without it affecting their schedule over east because the planes weren't flying at night otherwise.

Still, their fares were incredibly low (they had a $99 sale and remember they give free checked bags) but I don't think anyone had even know they flew the route.

For east coast routes they did have flights at decent times too, but again, they weren't very well known.
Not really, you said they were

>flying big jets to really small places that not many people want to go to.

and that 

>it costs more than customers are willing to pay

which is exactly the opposite of what I'm saying
Sorry, I missed

> to pre administration VA.
Hey mate. Give Qantas a call, they will rebook you. I put the Virgin form in immediately last night and have heard nothing still, Qantas rebooked me immediately this morning once I called them.
My flights are booked in September, so not the same situation as you. The webform was simple enough, and apparently they will get back to me in 3 business days. BUT the issue for me is I'm going overseas tomorrow and wont have roaming on, so... not sure how they will contact me.
It’s only been a few hours (not even business hours).
Hey mate. Give Qantas a call, they will rebook you. I put the Virgin form in immediately last night and have heard nothing still, Qantas rebooked me immediately this morning once I called them.
"the issue was that they weren't able to fill their planes...and so they couldn't generate enough revenue to make their jet operations profitable."

Why do you think this was?
lol funny timing literally just got my flights organised about an hour ago. Appreciate the help mate.
Did you ever hear from Virgin? It's been 2 days and nothing for me after submitting the form. Should I try calling Qantas?
Hey champ not sure when I asked about business hours? I’ve got a flight on Thursday and am understandably stressed. So unless you’ve got helpful advice about how to re-book or get through to customer service then I’m not interested in the smart comment of “it’s only been a few hours” like thanks? I know that.
Did they charge you?
That was because they weren't well known and had absolutely nothing to do with the destinations themselves.
Still yet to hear from Virgin. Just call Qantas.
No, explain you’re a Rex passenger and have your Rex booking info ready
