i’ve finally come to the conclusion that i need a bigger/better mattress. I’ve heard ecosa/one bed are good but i’m also open to any others that you have
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
I get bad lower back pain, thought it was just part of getting older. Stayed at holiday accommodation recently for 4 nights and didn't experience it at all! I asked the accommodation group to confirm the details of the mattress for me and have now purchased an Avante Majestic Prestige for $799. Can't wait for it to arrive and actually be able to sleep until sunrise
I love my ikea mattress. I didn’t think I would but I do.

I bought it as a temporary fix when I moved house, but I liked it so much I kept it. I’ve had it for 5 years and it’s still very comfy. I liked it so much I bought a second one for my guest room.

I don’t know what they have there now, but when I bought mine it was $300. 
Ecosa is decent
Our Koala one is the best mattress I've ever slept on and still in excellent condition after several years of use.
How firm do you want it? 

The Ikea pocket sprung matresses are great if you like it firmer.
A queen size Emma Comfort mattress is about $500 and I've been very happy with mine for the past two years. I chose it after seeing it rated #1 by Choice.
We ended up buying an Art & Science mattress from Sleeping Giant a couple of years ago, saw them mentioned on reddit actually and one of their models ended up being our favourite after spending a couple of hours checking different matresses out across a bunch of stores. 

Still very happy with it.
We recently bought my 3yo at the time son his first proper bed, after having a convertible cot/toddler bed thing for ages. We purchased a cheap box mattress for his bed. Literally just the store brand made in china mattress. It comes in an easy to carry box. 

In no way could you compare it to the $5.5k mattress wife and I sleep on, but it is properly super comfortable. I’ve fallen asleep on it many times.
We've have an Aldi mattress for 7 years, and it's good. The downside is that you can't try it out beforehand. They're on sale now.
Ecosa King Sized mattress. $900++.
I just got an ecosa and returned it due to back pain. Got a koala mattress instead and no problems.
How did you get a concussion? If you fell out of bed, maybe you do need a new mattress.
I find the IKEA ones quite hard unless you buy a topper then they are pretty comfy.
+1 for Koala; mine is 18 months and still perfect. Incredibly comfortable and I like that you can adjust the firmness if you want.
