So, for reference I am just about to turn 20 and I was born at Dubbo hospital. I had quite a lot of complications at birth, and I was born 5 weeks early (not sure what the official name is but basically my placenta detached and died while I was in the womb so I wasn't getting the proper nutrients and stuff I needed to survive). My mother felt something was wrong, and rushed to Mudgee Hospital who then rushed her to Dubbo overnight. For some reason there was no emergency surgeon available at the hospital when we arrived as we were later getting in then they thought so were sent home???? Anyway, they eventually came in and my mother had an emergency c section (we were told if I was born any later I would have died).

Both my parents afterwards tried getting my birth records (like what actually happened) as they wanted to know what caused the issues but the hospital refused to give them it. My mothers GP at the time, after hearing they wouldn't give access to us tried also getting access to what caused it and what happened but he also was refused access. My parents were told that if they wanted to see it they had to go back to Dubbo and see it in the hospital, where they weren't allowed to take any pictures or take it out of the room and someone had to be with them at all time (which is weird..). They didn't do this...

I just feel like this is wrong, and my parents believe (especially with their experience at Dubbo) that something was covered up, that they didn't want us to know about. I thought that we were allowed access to stuff like this legally as it is within our right? 


https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/your-privacy-rights/health-information/access-your-health-information

Why don't you try to request them now? Although they may not still have the records as they don't need to keep them forever.
There has been change in how hospitals respond to requests to access records over the past 20 years. You should try again to request them [here](https://www.wslhd.health.nsw.gov.au/wnh/patients-and-visitors/health-record-request). “You are entitled to request access to your information including your health record held by health services in NSW. Normally you will be asked to apply for access in writing and provide identification. You may be charged a fee if you request copies of your information or health record.”
1. Google the hospital + access medical records
2. To go website for the above
3. Download and complete the form to access your medical records
4. Pay the fee
5. Await contact from the hospital

You were admitted to the hospital after you were born, you will have your own hospital number and medical record. Given the events of your birth, it will have some degree of information regarding the birth in your file.

As for the cause of the placental abruption, they may or may not know. Common causes are maternal hypertension and physical trauma, but there are a range of other potential causes and risk factors. And sometimes it's just random and the reason for it is never discovered.

Regarding what occurred when they tried to access your records. At the time if your parents felt something was being covered up then they should have gone to the hospital and viewed your records. Nowadays it's irrelevant, you're under 25 so legally they have to retain your medical records, and requesting it is a simple process. They may well still even have your mother's record if she wanted to file her own request, not every hospital destroys them (ours go into long term storage off site).
It's quite possible the records no longer exist, if they were filed under your mother's identity, because legally they're only obliged to retain them for seven years. Hospital records for pediatric cases _are_ supposed to be kept until you're at least 25 though, so if a UR was generated for you then records filed under it should be available for a few years yet.
Another issue is that there have been some big changes in technology in the past couple of decades, and they may be trying to discourage a casual request for access to records if it means having to dive into an obsolete system. I think you'll probably need to get legal advice and make a formal application for access to your records to get any traction.
[deleted]
I think my parents have kinda just accepted the fact they would never get an answer. I don't think they'd want to try and gain access again 20 years later. (If that was even possible) 

It's just something that bothers me and makes me curious. Just as the whole thing was traumatic (not that I remember) for me and my mother and how we never really got any answers about what happened.
Need to correct this. Medical records of birthing events in NSW public hospitals have a retention period of between 10 and 50 years after the event under the State Records Act.
It’s a common misconception that all different records need to be retained for 7 years, which is a common retention for financial documents. Many organisations are poor at records disposal, so while they may exist they may not be easily/at all retreivable.
I mean, they were allowed access if they went to the hospital to view them.
> You are allowed access to your own records.

That wasn't automatic 20 years ago - the laws making records freely accessible have come in to being since then
Yeah, my parents at the time didn't believe they'd get anywhere taking legal action. Don't think it'll be possible now, unfortunately
What exactly were they wanting to know? It seems they know she had a placental abruption (cause is usually unknown if no trauma) and so you were delivered early, not sure what else they were after? Smaller regional hospitals don't always have staff on site and they have to be called in.
You can ask it's about you and you're over 18.
That's only what we were told by Mum's GP by the hospital, I think.  He said it wasn't worth it as it wouldn't have been the full thing. Only a short brief on most of the stuff we already knew. 

Was all a bit strange.
It’s not “legal action” but a lawyer might be able to help you navigate your rights under the legislation. Under the NSW Health Records Information Privacy Act you have a right to access your personal health information. If it’s hard to navigate you contact the hospital to find out how to make a request, or a lawyer can help you understand how to make a valid request. Then if it’s unsuccessful you can speak with the Commonwealth Information Commissioner (OAIC) or the NSW Privacy Commissioner (IPC) about the matter.
Under the State Records Act birth episode records are required to be retained for between 10 and 50 years depending on the specifics of the event. They may still exist and be request-able, except now they will photocopy them instead on insisting on an in-person viewing.
And as far as the OP saying the doctor was sent home … probably yes, but would you want a fatigued (in the legal sense of having been on shift for too long) doctor operating on you? 

I don’t think there’s much more to it than that. 

Plus pretty much positive that the medical record won’t keep track of staff movements through the shift; it will have date/time, actions/events, sign off by Doctor/Nurse. It won’t have anything like “oh we sent Dr Jim home cos Mrs Smith was 20 minutes later than expected, but he said just give him a holler if she finally turns up”
It did used to be the way you were able to view your records back when everything was still paper.
