
Most teachers I've talked to have commented at some point about the towering pile of administrative crap they have to wade through each year, so this story isn't the least bit surprising.
The most impactful thing I've seen comparing the public and private schools I've worked at has been that the private school had the freedom and capital to create a full-time position specifically for these grant applications.
My mother works for a smallish rural public school as an aide and one of her responsibilities is to apply for and get grants. The P&C have a bonus scheme for anyone who gains grants that they’ll pay 10% of a grants value to the person who successfully receives one for the school. I’ve always wondered why no one else does it but then I saw the work she puts in to get some grants, anywhere from a few thousand to $100k grants.

My mother applies for so many and puts in a lot of work towards them, including projects with the kids, getting quotes for works, doing media, traveling with kids and teachers around the country when they win things, etc.

She has done this for a couple of decades now and successfully gained the school millions of dollars in grants.
Neoliberalism has decimated education in Australia. We need to stop funding private schools and provide more for state schools. Canada figured it out, most of Europe figured it out (excluding England). We can figure it out. The longer we cling to this inequitable, outdated model of funding and school design, the more harmful it will become for future generations.
Some schools that can afford it have a full or part time staff member whose sole job is to do this. But government policy will do anything to make sure a private school gets an upgraded footy oval instead.
this is why private schools end up costing us just as much as public schools, quite a few have at least one person full time doing these grant applications, and they are disproportionately beneficiaries to them.
Nothing new here…
Wouldn't be doing admin work for the school be on par for the course for a *principal*, though?
While blank cheques are written for private schools for their advisors, accountants, trust managers and polo fields. You wonder when they are going to ask teachers to throw in some extra effort to do the cleaning in the schools.

Its always amazes me that politicians  have never heard of a balance sheet and how the basic principles of accounting works. Now if they were running each school on a balance sheet and general ledger they would know in 20 seconds after  printing a report which schools would need their funding topped up. I suppose they cant implement a basic accounting system for schools or cant afford Microsofts eye watering price gouging contract price to get the job  done. With no trained public servants in a designated IT department that could pull off something like this, public schools suffer because of shambolic dysfunctional governance.  " we cant run a cost accounting system for handful of schools in 2024, we only have access to  abacus methods and the principle"
We can figure it out. It's just that there are many vested interests not keen for us to do that. The Catholic and Independent school lobbies are very powerful, and have far more of a say than they should. 
Private school principals have the Minister's phone number lol
Private health is the same, its funny the whole idea of privatisation is to reduce the bureaucracy, the bureaucracy fights back though.
its pretty simple, the poorer the area a school is in, the more money you need to throw at it.

but people complain then because their rich school is low on funding.

really depends what your end goal is... equality or things being equal
>While blank cheques are written for private schools for their advisors, accountants, trust managers and polo fields. You wonder when they are going to ask teachers to throw in some extra effort to do the cleaning in the schools.


Private schools aren't under as many resource restraints and can actually apply for the grants because there are more staff. It's a fundamental I equity we've built into our schooling system, and it's not going to get better without reform. The current funding model in nonsensical. No other country funds private schools like we do, and nor do they do so so lavishly. 
No. Check the school facilities. If they don't meet a minimum standard, then they get funding to get them to that standard.


>its pretty simple, the poorer the area a school is in, the more money you need to throw at it.


This is how private schools are currently funded, and it produces outcomes like very wealthy schools getting loads of money that should be spent elsewhere (because they have world class rugby fields, heated swimming pools, concert halls, etc) and the public school down the road doesn't even have air conditioning or textbooks. That formula results in both schools getting the same level of funding, when really the poorer school needs all of it. 


Where schooling is concerned, we need equality of outcomes. Especially if we're paying for it. 
that would just end in schools stopping paying maintanance on facilities and using it elsewhere, its a bad idea.

Funding needs to go to schools according to socio-economic status, as that correlates extremely highly with where the kids need the most help.

Private schools very wealthy near poor public schools? how would they? the private school will be full of rich kids while the public one is full of poor ones, so according to funding public would get massively more.
Incorrect. My school desperately needs new toilets. The only way to get said toilets is through a capital works grant. Which I spent several hours doing and still not guaranteed.
He’s that’s what happens. Most of the white people put their kids in the private. The low ses school always has the disabled and the migrants. My child is disabled so she’s in this cohort. We definitely need more funding
