
Virgin Australia can't even support its own customers let alone anyone else's.
Qantas and Jetstar are also offering the same help to REX customers. 

Hopefully very few REX customers on capital city routes will be left grounded.

Does anyone know if airports were in chaos today with REX customers turning up for cancelled flights?
Customers and people?
As a customer, I find it really insulting that the duopoly that killed a genuinely great third alternative get to position themselves as the good guys in this. Fucking ghouls. As soon as there's another viable alternative to Virgin and Qantas I'll be shifting my business again. Rex was *good*. Not just "better than Virgin or Qantas"... properly *good*. If they'd got just one of those peak time slots I would have used them at least twice a month. Absolute shitshow.
Yeah but they've announced it, so it's fine/happening. 

😆

/s
Correct. Profit units and executives.
Rex management killed themselves I'm sure there are many other reasons to be mad and virgin and qantas but this is entirely Rex's fault.
The only reason Rex are in this mess is because they decided to go all in on betting that Virgin would be a liquidation in 2020.   Risk you take when you overstretch yourself to try and act like vultures.
I just got rebooked on a Virgin flight for free. Their call centre is getting slammed but they are following through with their claim of supporting stranded travellers.

Not bad as Rex sent the text out at 10:30pm last night cancelling all flights and saying to call Virgin, who managed to get me on a flight around the same booking time today.
It's partially their fault, but a huge contributor to this is the Qantas backlash to their entry into the golden triangle and government's inaction on allocating them prime slots. Qantas are more at fault than Virgin–they retaliated hard because they could afford to do so–and Rex certainly take their share of blame for mismanagement, but this wouldn't have happened if the duopoly had played fair. Virgin harvesting "customers and people" so brazenly at this point when they literally have nowhere else to go is just ghoulish.
Damn.. that's great, I'm glad you got a quick resolution! Being stuffed around whilst travelling is rough. 

To be fair Virgin has been OK for me to date. Qantas on the other hand.. well, let's not go there.
You raise some good points. but if a company trying blatantly to get some good pr helps a bunch of people who would be stuck other wise I'm ok with it. Even if it is picking flesh of a barley dead corpse it's still helping people.
As much as I despise them, why would competitors “play fair”? If they acted legally, that is the most that could be expected. If the system restricts competition, the spineless regulators are to blame.
