
I'm not sure how to feel about this because at the end of the day the bank will still make their profit so this will just be passed on to the rest of us customers but the banks need to own some responsibility for not protecting customers but do banks even posses the right legal right to prevent fraud?

My co-worker was at the commonwealth a few months ago and she was behind a daughter tearing shreds into the manager about why they would allow her elderly mother to transfer $24k to a foreign Indian account.  The manager explained that they warned and inquired with her mum several times that is she sure she isn't being scammed and the mother still was happy to send the money.  So in that circumstance what is the bank to do?  If they raise their concern with their client about the scam threat but the person still goes ahead anyway, how can we better protect that elderly lady?
If banks are going to be compensating customers for transfers they authorise themselves I expect to see a lot of institutions start exiting risky clients and it will be very difficult to open an account going forwards.
Compensation is a terrible idea and only results in the scammers winning. Perhaps the banks could cover legal costs to the client, but not compensation for poor decisions.
Remember how the government also “vowed” to stop phone spammers
This is just going to make it really annoying for anyone to transfer money. I already use a second app to get a code to transfer money in my banking app (which has endless warnings about scams). 

Ultimately, you can’t save people from themselves.
Why wouldn't a new scam network develop with scammers sending money to their mates overseas then crying foul to get compensation?
> For banks, this will include greater controls over bank transfers and an obligation to identify and close “mule” accounts.
All they really need is a requirement to match account names on a transfer (or at least have bsb and account identify an account name like payid).

Forcing compensation for people who should know better will just make banks pass the costs onto everyone else. My interest rate / account fees don't need to increase because someone genuinely believed a stranger on the internet promising a 400% return on investment in 9 just months.
While I agree you can't save people from themselves, we do have a vested interest in protecting our social welfare net. Money leaving the country lines scammers pockets and often puts those people on welfare etc. We all have a vested interest in taking a social financial health view of this problem.
All this does is signal to scammers that they can double dip against the gullible. Imagine the person who sent a scammer 40k for some shitty crypto offer and then gets bailed out to only get hitched by different version of the same scam.
Ok I'd say let's wait and see the legislation. What exactly will they be asking the banks to do, what will the requirements they need to meet. If this is about 'hey banks, you left the vulnerability here, you need to make this right' then that would be fair, eg they knew of a vulnerable practice or behaviour and could do something about it and did not do so.
No. The money will have to come from other bank customers in the form of increased loan rates/decreased savings rates/increased fees. As a bank customer - why should I be punished for the stupidity of others?
Scams and frauds are becoming more sophisticated. With regular data leaks of people's ID documents, identity takeover will likely become a more common issue. There is a need for banks to improve both frontend and backend anti-fraud measures, otherwise we're all sitting ducks and our bank accounts aren't safe.
There’s this one bloke who has been scamming me out of money ever since I was 18. After about my 8th pint when I’ve had enough to drink for the evening my account gets hacked to the tune of about 8 more pints. 

The amount of times of woken up on a weekend and realised I’ve been scammed the night before is utterly ridiculous. It’ll be great when I can claim that back.
Like sophistic scams or areas of actual Bank security deficiency (like say the ATO, mygov easy super transfer one that happened), or like Debbie, giving her "do not tell to anyone" code to an obvious scammer? I don't want to subsidize that with higher fees.

I already get hassled by the Bank for moving a couple of grand to buy a car.
Time to setup a Cayman islands account and start scamming myself into sending my money to the mysterious Guy Incognito. Money dupe hack time. 

The speech he gave doesn't say much except basically compensate for lax security or incompetence. So I'm guessing if your dear old mum goes into the bank and lawfully sends money that wouldn't be covered anyway. Also compensation is a pretty broad term. Funny because the transactions are lawful now in a way, which is the ministers point. It's a great headline but I think the actual policy coming from it will surprise surprise be very boring. Here's hoping it's at least useful then I guess.
Fucking honestly people, read more than the headline!

> “Compensation for inaction, for negligence, for failing to meet an obligation is a critical part of our framework.”

> For banks, this will include greater controls over bank transfers and an obligation to identify and close “mule” accounts.

> “If there is a breach of the code, the bank, telco or digital platform will be held to account,” Jones will say.

> “If they drop the ball, they will be liable to compensate the victim.”

This is about the banks getting better at spotting and preventing fraud, at validating transfers better and combatting what happens \*after\* a dodgy transfer, which is usually money moving between multiple compromised 'mule' accounts before being moved out of the country.  


Jesus christ, how many people just saying "Hurrr durrr they're going to take my money to pay out morons"
I feel like all that's going to come of this is banks will have more control over OUR money than we do in the guise of "sEcUrItY".
I don't know how I feel about this, sure banks can be pretty shit but whatever happens they are always gonna want a profit. Ultimately that means that those of us not dumb enough to get scammed are gonna have to compensate those that are.
you know if the government simply enforced the requirement to check names on transactions that the royal commission stated unequivocally would stop nearly all bank fraud this wouldn't be a problem. much of the fraud is literally just people putting there name as "APPLE INC" or "GOOGLE" or some other trusted group then draining people dry and getting away with it becuase the banks will not check names. despite having a system in place since the 90s that hands them the names.
why should the banks pay for people's stupidity?
I have sent police around to some one's house that was getting scammed and they sent the police away as the police were invading the person's privacy and they did not want help. The ended up losing 300k and came crying to me afterwards and I sent them away. You just can't help stupid
I think this is a Stupid idea and could to Lead to a new form of Scam (ie You pretend to have been scammed) 

i like the concept I Want to Help people But this aint it cheif
British banks are legally liable and must reimburse the vast majority of scam victims. 

Seems like this brings our banks into line and is good policy.
Ugh finally. I hope the banks or the wallet companies can be held responsible for their lack of action here.

The other day I was walking down the street when a man told me he figured out a python AI code from the bible and if I handed him $100,000 cash he'd give me a 100 x return. Naturally I did no due diligence and handed the funds over.

Unbeknownst to me - he was a scammer! He took all my money. Now I have tried to sue the brown paper bag company I used to transport these funds, and the banks for letting me, an adult, access my own money and the wallet company I carry my cash around in because they should have known better. I'll update you all as to how I go but I'm glad the Albanese government is finally holding others accountable for my actions!
>“We will address this to ensure victims can receive compensation in the right circumstances,” Jones will say. “Compensation for inaction, for negligence, for failing to meet an obligation is a critical part of our framework.”

This really depends on how the right circumstances are defined. If it is legitimately the bank's wrongdoing - I don't know how often that is - then it's understandable. But it seems a lot of the time it's someone being really silly with their money, transferring to accounts they shouldn't after the bank has repeatedly flagged that it's a likely scam and they've ignored plenty of red flags.
This can go wrong so many ways. Banks already do a lot to prevent scammers short of preventing people from making transfers and withdrawals. They try and educate their customers about scams and ask probing questions during withdrawals and transfers. Customers outright lie and get pissy when asked because it's THEIR money and they can do what they want with it, but at the same time they're not responsible for it.  
This will lead to customers faking being scammed to get free money from the bank, costs will be passed on to the consumer, and making transfers and withdrawals will become a massive pain in the ass.  
And people are going to be less wary of scams because they'll just get reimbursed by the bank.  
Source: i worked in a bank for 10 years and dealt with this kinda thing on a daily basis.
What happens when it’s the banks and colesworth that are the true scammers?
Why doesn’t Labor jail the wankers who keep doing this? All these white collar criminals who don’t even have to pay a fine. The corporations pay it.
Don't do this. This people need to learn. All this will do is increase insurances for all the rest of us.
Stupid, people need to wake the fuck up, scamming isn't new.


Most scams use to be already rich people trying to make MORE money, they would go on 60 minutes every now and then and play their little violin. 


Oh woe is me I risked my lfe savings on a scheme to make more money!


The rest need to just follow simple rules.
Official numbers/channels only.


Seriously, how can people be so cavalier and whimsical with so much money?


1 text and people are ready to give full access to whatever.
I don't see how the Govt can really promise this.  First of all, what about all the people who have already been scammed?  It'll be unfair if they don't get their funds back if others are.

Second, many of us have Super/shares in banks.  I don't want my dividends reduced to pay for other people's stupidity.

Thirdly people are stupid, so it's their problem.
This is a bad move IMO.

Moral Hazard is a thing.  It basically means people will be less caring and therefore more suseptible to scams, knowing the bank will reimburse them.

There's plenty of stories of boomers (mostly) getting seriously angry at bank tellers for trying to prevent them being scammed.  Like old mate trying to withdraw $10k for the 3rd time this month.  He then complains "the bank has NO RIGHT to know what I'm doing with MY MONEY".  Then gets scammed out of his life savings and complains "the bank MUST PAY ME BACK".
I bet that the insurance companies have a hand in this. 
If the banks are forced to compensate customers who are scammed, expect getting your money out of the bank to become a lot harder
How about telecommunications companies with scam calls and texts
This should always be "Within reason" and only if the bank is at fault for not offering and prompting use of things like 2FA, Password conditions and confirmation steps on transfers over x amount 

The banks shouldn't be responsible for people who naively give out their details and are scammed through their own stupidity.
I get many people reporting to my company that they've been scammed, because they're stupid enough to go to our website which is a similar domainname to the gov't site for reporting scams.

I've got warnings on the site explaining we're not who to report scams to, but they still naively send me personal information and details of the scams.

I tell them that many people are being scammed on a daily basis, usually due to the victim not carefully confirming who they're dealing with, of software they're installing, or the website they're entering their data into. They insist they've made no such mistake.

Fucking idiots, regularly being scammed out of tens of thousands of dollars.

edit: apparently my coment [is deemed off-topic](https://support.reddithelp.com/hc/en-us/articles/205926439-Reddiquette#:~:text=or%20is%20off%2Dtopic%20in%20a%20particular%20community%2C%20downvote%20it.).
Why don't they force people to be responsible for their own actions?

It's people's greed that makes them gullible to scammers. I may have missed out on genuine offers in the past, as my attitude is "If the deal is so good, why are they offering it to me?".

Given all the warnings, I fail to see how anyone would be hoodwinked.

I have no sympathy for greedy idiots. Let them wear the outcomes.
Boomers just keep getting rewarded
At first I was a little skeptical, but honestly. Force them to make this shit harder to happen with actual consequences, they can afford to make their services far more secure.
This is dumb another reason why labor is to be kicked out.

Getting scammed is not a nice feeling but you as an adult have the responsibility to exercise your own due diligence in these situations.

It really isn’t the banks responsibility to refund people who are not responsible for their own actions.
This is simply to appeal to all the older voters. The same demographic that politicians will firmly decide not to make them retest their driving abilities each year.
What’s to stop me tricking myself?
Make social media and telcos completely compensate scam victims if the scammer initiated contact through them and the problem would be solved overnight. With no access to victims there can be no scams. Punishing banks is the wrong approach
And the nanny state lives on. This is such a bad idea.
Sorry but if you're stupid enough to fall for a scam you don't deserve compensation.
I think trying to work with phone companies to fix number spoofing might get a better outcome than this, which will pass costs on to consumers anyway.
I think it is all about educating the account holder and follow the rules .
How do you stop the spoofing emails or calls that trick people to give access to their bank accounts
Will only make banking impossible for oldies or more expensive/less rewarding for those that know how not to be scammed.
Lol.  Ridiculous policy. 

Im sorry; should we have been paying for every person whos been defrauded throughout history?

There is not some new unstoppable form of fraud.  Some of it is CRAZY sophisticated.  But the VAST majority is absolutely regarded dumb pig butchering bullshit.  Not one single cent of any company or government money should go towards refunding that.

Large payments are already inconvenient enough.  I do not want to jog at the pace of the very slowest of the slow.  Educate yourself, or get rekt.  I should not have to adjust my life to compensate for your egregious idiocy.
Tricked v stupid
Get a friend. Make it look like they scammed you. Request compensation. Repeat.
This is probably just more for them to get more control over how people spend their money and less about scammers.
I think this is stupid. People need to start taking responsibility for themselves instead of crying and expecting the government to bail them out.


We already have some seriously restrictive banking practices in place thanks to anti scamming and the like, and the last thing we need is more of it. (ATM and teller withdrawal limits, transfer limits, cards being stopped just in case, reporting of transactions over a certain amount, people being grilled on why they are withdrawing their money, to name but a few).

The safer we make people feel the less responsibility they will take for their own selves.
I used to work for CBA, they eventually end up cancelling the person's account and saying you can't bank with us anymore.

It's the only way to protect some of the idiots who get scammed constantly.  It's not worth having them as a customer.
I work at a bank so I may be biased, but I'm definitely not on board with holding banks responsible for preventing scams. I really, REALLY do not like the idea of giving the bank the power to control someone's money like that, and also I do not want cookers screaming at me because I won't let them transfer $100,000 to their "boyfriend" stuck in Thailand.

It's genuinely going to put a lot of staff in danger. I've been physically threatened by customers who were obviously about to fall for scams before, and having to actually prevent them from making those decisions instead of just doing my due diligence and making them aware that it's a scam would probably have ended in me being assaulted
Nobody reads the article any more.

>“Compensation for inaction, for negligence, for failing to meet an obligation is a critical part of our framework.”  
...  
"For banks, this will include greater controls over bank transfers and an obligation to identify and close “mule” accounts.

>“If there is a breach of the code, the bank, telco or digital platform will be held to account,” Jones will say.

>“If they drop the ball, they will be liable to compensate the victim.”

It's saying banks can do a better job detecting compromised accounts and tracing where the money goes. Might not have prevented your exact example there, but *nobody is talking about blanket compensation in all circumstances*.

In a lot of the scams and hacks, the money dances through half a dozen on-shore accounts before it disappears out of the country, and when the customer or police enquire as to where it's gone and why nobody stopped it, they throw up their hands. This may require better cross-bank cooperation and better intelligence in their systems, it's not necessarily an easy thing to detect, but neither is it impossible. If they fail to do this, \*then\* they will find themselves liable for the fraud.

In the example you give, it seems they made their best attempts to get the lady to stop, so I imagine they wouldn't be on the hook there.

It's saying "Up your game people, or it'll cost you", which I think is perfectly reasonable.

>do banks even posses the right legal right to prevent fraud?

Yep, they can prevent suspicious transactions and already do so all over the place. They do it less with bank transfers than other methods like card payments, which is why the scammers target those more. But even with transfers we've seen stuff like Nab blocking transfers to 'high risk' cryptocurrency exchanges, as a pre-emptive measure, due to high levels of fraud.
In your example, the measures in place to stop that one woman doing something silly would be an absolute nuisance for everyone else.


We can’t keep bringing in more rules because each time we do, society creates an even better idiot.
A signed stat dec signed by the customer would be the solution here if they keep pushing.
> The manager explained that they warned and inquired with her mum several times that is she sure she isn't being scammed and the mother still was happy to send the money. So in that circumstance what is the bank to do? If they raise their concern with their client about the scam threat but the person still goes ahead anyway, how can we better protect that elderly lady?

I don't think we need to be asking the banks to do any more there, and in that circumstance they shouldn't be held responsible or accountable.

I think a positive change here would be to force the banks to put in place safeguards to prevent a lot of the scams taking place, multi factor confirmation for transactions would be a great goal for example (where the sender and the intended recipient both confirm the transaction). But also simple things like not allowing large international transfers of cash out straight after receiving large transfers of cash in. Put in place some strong rules, regulations and procedures to protect people, then fine banks if they don't adhere to those. The rules, regulations and procedures will be what protects people, not the fines.

But all those in place wouldn't have helped in the example given, where the person was repeatedly warned, and specifically so.
This anecdote made me laugh "my coworker was behind a woman at the bank and overheard this conversation"

"Me mums sisters brothers cousins dad's neighbours dog told me"
They could do nothing. What did the daughter do to take control of her mothers finance if she was not capable to manage them herself?

The laws should be changed to ensure that banks protect their customers to a certain level but you can only do so much before those laws would block legitimate transfers.
I tried to convince my elderly mother to put two to sign on her investment accounts.  She was not interested.  She reckons she will never get conned but I will bet I could do a setup and have her scammed.
Simple, they will simply block any transaction they think is a scam and force you to withdraw cash or use a different bank.

If i was responsible for reimbursement of scams, you can bet there would be far more restrictions on peoples accounts.
Yeah but they can make more profits by protecting people.
Gotta look out for the boomers!
My god the bank would obviously know the sending account is in India.

I’m agreeing it’s a tragedy, I’m emphasising that the bank won’t actually stop a blatant scam transfer when they should.
Wouldn't that be anyone who invests in crypto or stocks? The banks already don't like that
This is what will happen.


People sooked about ATM fees and now they sook about a lack of ATM's because guess what, banks aren't charities, why would they provide ATM's if they can't make money from them. Same thing with branches and even cheques. Why would a bank run a loss making service for such a minimal number of customers. 
If the banks face costs for allowing scams, they'll be incentivised to stop scams from happening. Banks have far better tools than individuals for detecting fraudulent activity, and can actually pay people to be on the lookout for it, and to educate their customers about it. 


Putting all the onus on the individual, who are being targeted by social engineering, and might otherwise not have a check on their activity, is removing a line of defence that should very much be there. 
Having banks be responsible is actually the best way forward. The UK did it and literally overnight the volume of scam $ being taken fell off a cliff. 


There are a huge amount of things the banks could do to prevent scam transfers but they don't because they don't give a shit. Suddenly they had to care and somehow all the 'issues' preventing proper protections being put in place just vanished.
On that side of things the government is working with telcos to find ways to prevent these calls.  One of the methods that is being developed for the more complex scams though requires changes to legislation that people are likely to not be comfortable with.

The approach that has been developed uses a voice to text system to real time transcribe the call and then pass it through an LLM to detect patterns that match known scams.  It would then drop the call and play a message to the consumer saying the call has been identified as likely scam.

The problem is that this requires changes to the privacy legislation to allow telcos to monitor and intercept calls for processing for reasons outside of what they are currently allowed.
I rarely get scam phone calls now. Even scam SMS have dropped off significantly
I've not gotten a spam message or call for months, so on my end it seems to be working. I still get them on Whatsapp however.
That's the problem no system is fool proof, there will all ways be some people that lose. 

  
Personally I think the government should open up a bank which requires incredibly high standards of MFA and multi day waits for large transfers and prevent transactions from being sent overseas. Then it can guarantee any one who uses that bank and gets scammed will be refunded. If people are choosing not to setup 2FA or to transfer hundreds of thousands overseas it's on them.
You can save some people, and that's worthwhile. Just because a system is not 100% foolproof is not a great argument to not have the system. 
tbh, it should be annoying
Because that's not what the article is about.

You know you always hear - "And then I did the transfer and I feel so stupid, and we contacted the bank but they said the money moved out of the receiving account immediately and they lost track of it and now it's just gone?"

This is talking about making banks get better at spotting these compromised receiving accounts and tracing the fact that this money danced through six other mule accounts before disappearing overseas.

It's not "compensate everyone, always", it's "Hey banks, get better at tracing and preventing this shit or you'll have to pay out"
yeah this is Good But short sighted
They already so, or the Fraud Dept I work for does.
Yay, at least OP read the article!

So many responses saying "This is terrible, they can't just compensate everyone left right and centre!" while the actual speech was about making banks take better precautions and get better at spotting fraud in their own systems, then making them liable if they don't do that.
If it were that simple, scams would be eliminated overnight. Except they aren't. 

I live in Singapore now, which has the highest per capita losses to scams in the world and a government very keen in stopping this from happening (who, by the way, also own the biggest local bank) yet scams keep happening despite tons of controls and education. 

And it isn't an "old people don't understand technology or can't spot scams issue". The most represented demographic of people scammed here are in their 20s and 30s.
They have name check now, but it’s a little late - you’d think that it would come out of the box.    Matching names will not fully protect, if names are changeable or you get the old “oh it’s my wife’s account” or “it’s my old name”. You’ll also need an data sharing across all banks for it to work
It's just as much about what happens \*after\* the transfer.

It's about tracing and stopping the money dancing through half a dozen compromised accounts before disappearing overseas. It's saying if they don't get better at this, instead of what usually happens when they get asked where the money went - "Errrr .... money gone?" - \*then\* they're going to be liable to compensate.
This is a good point most people seem to miss. Also, Australia’s reported losses were up to $2.74 billion in 2023.

https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/scam-losses-decline-but-more-work-to-do-as-australians-lose-27-billion
Give power and resources to afp to chase the scammers, they need to work with international policing agencies since most of the scams are in the countries you’d imagine they would originate  from
>person who sent a scammer 40k f

sorry now in my head you just send a single model in the mail lol and thats the scam
This is exactly what I think.
The reason they would do this is because it is effective. like lets say you had the government (taxpayer) cover these losses. The banks in this scenario have zero motivation to solve the issue. Structurally it's not a fix, just paying money to scammers. It may even encourage more.

The banks own internal and intra systems are enabling the fraud, and they are the ones best placed to stop it. And if the cost of fraud is theirs, they will be extremely keen to do so. Structurally, you've created motivation to improve the banking system without dictating how.

The third option is of course to do nothing and call victims of scams or hackers stupid.
banks are able to do a lot more , they just straight up don't bother, and instruct the call-centre staff to politely tell the victims to get bent.
Because if you as a bank customer aren't paying, you as a taxpayer will be paying via the aged pension and other social security supports. Unless you want poor people to just lie down and die on the street for your financial benefit of course. 
The big banks make tens of billions in profits, as a bank customer you are paying their shareholders already.  This would be a drop in a bucket compared to their profits.
> I already get hassled by the Bank for moving a couple of grand to buy a car.

People will turn around and say good the Bank needs to pay for these obvious scams and then call up their customer service and abuse staff when their 5k transaction to a brand new account number overseas gets held up more than 5 minutes.

"High risk" accounts with extra oversight need to be enabled for seniors or vulnerable people as a default. Everyone else shouldn't have to suffer.
Hopefully they’ll improve their performance with the new legislation.
They shouldn't, that's why the article talks about them being liable when they've been negligent. The headline is misleading.
It's not about blanket compensation for everyone, the headline is misleading. It's about getting the banks to improve their fraud detection on compromised receiving accounts, and generally having better due-diligence and traceability on stuff. Then making them liable if they don't do that.
This is true. But many people only read news related to tgeir own country and so are ignorant of such matters.
R U OK
There's more to it than that though.

What happens after the transfer? How often do you hear "And they traced the money to the receiving account but it was already gone"?

There's much more that can be done to ensure that these receiving accounts are detected and shut down, and there's much more that can be done to trace the money through the (often many) accounts it moves through before it leaves the country.

Decent legislation could give the banks an incentive to get better at this stuff, preventing more fraud and stopping them just throwing up their arms and saying they don't know where it went.
Like this person?

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-01/adrian-katong-phishing-scams-network-bulletproftlink-malaysia/104118036
It's absurd to see all the ABC articles give a platform to scam "victims" and asking them suggestions on what more should be done to stop scams. If they were of sound judgement then they wouldn't be in this position would they lmao
Or you could read the article and find out what was actually proposed.
A high percentage of people in our society are functionally illiterate. Calling them abusive names does not help.

> It is one way to measure literacy. In Australia: about 44% of adults read at literacy level 1 to 2 (a low level) 38% of adults read at level 3.

https://www.stylemanual.gov.au/accessible-and-inclusive-content/literacy-and-access#
Mate, even smart professional people are getting stung, especially with AI and EMail spoofing with Real estate transactions.  Sure, it's easy to avoid, but only if you're fully aware
And will also mean the telcos get full access to your voice calls, sms data and Internet traffic.
Making our banks implement tech other banks in other countries with different legislation to our lot is not “punishing banks”.
Right, their trickery is endless e,g

https://www.experian.com/blogs/ask-experian/the-latest-scams-you-need-to-aware-of/
I think these comments about people being scammed is unfair. When you sign up for an account there should be a basic security questionnaire like:

* Limit for daily withdrawal
* Overseas transfer limit
* Limit of transfer to one corporation or individual
* Countries where money is transferred too regularly
* Transaction Alert level all transactions
* Transfer countries blocked (all or list)
* Exceptional transaction register with 2FA approval for amounts great than nominated amounts
* Even breaking a large sum of money down into 10 or 20 payments that can be staggered over 7 days. Only scammers would object!

Etc  etc.

 There is a lot of basic blocks that could be put into place for older or incompetent people that will need to be over ridden with 24hours notice or by going into a bank with a ID. Most people dont transfer money to bizarre countries. if you have links to a overseas country this could be on your preferred country list. There are endless combination of smarts that could implemented as smart blocking actions. Including a cooling off periods for transaction larger than 20k(or nominated) along with a phone call and 2FA and SMS etc etc etc.

Its sad that amount like 200k plus can be transferred with no checks to countries that people have no dealings with! If some of the above were registered on an account then most scams could be prevented. After all if you use the Commsec site you have to do all sorts of identification checks, overseas security transaction checks and follow a lot of procedures to trade and control large sums of money. All of these checks could be done in a app, online or in the bank. A smart adult could set up their parents account to essentially put in all these blocks including a list of nominated  billers  that a old person uses. This can even be done in Bpay.

So I dont think we should be making excuses for the banks who dont care and cant be bothered to protect their customers.
They could easily have an at risk account profile which puts hard stops in place to help, like block all foreign transfers and any transfer over $1,000, including cumulative transfers over a period of say a month. But that's harder than just cancelling the account.
How does forcing people to change banks protect the idiots? Seems like it protects the bank.
Someone I know is constantly scammed. The bank put a digital hold on her account until she has proof her phone has been double checked for problems by a Tech. Not even allowed to use the app!
It's not just about preventing transactions at the sender end though.

Imagine the (AFAICT fairly common) situation where someone gets tricked into transferring $10k to "The ATO", but it's actually some guy's account at another bank that the scammers have compromised, and then it disappears from there through five other compromised accounts before it finally leaves Australia.

a) There should be more pre-transfer checks on the transfer destination at the victim's bank, just as there would be for (say) a credit card transaction. Yes there are already some, let's do more. (I hope these don't end up with you in danger, but a lot of this stuff never goes near a physical branch)

b) The receiving bank should have spotted the compromised receiving account and frozen it, can we get better at that? Repeat for all the other accounts in the chain.

c) Can we put some cross-bank intelligence in place to spot money moving across six accounts then disappearing? Surely those sorts of patterns can be flagged? Maybe we can even catch it before it heads overseas?
I am going to credit to the banks (no pun intended) and suggest that they are not liable for this unless there is a framework. However banks are much more than a simple transfer and storage service, they offer complex utility to the public and as such has a duty of care even if that is limited. So in cases such as:

1. An account has been opened without the proper requirements
2. Unusual activity has been detected on the account
3. An account has been flagged

And possibly others then they hold some responsibility, and actions like seeking confirmation may be required. I am not saying that this does not take place now, I am just giving examples. It cannot just be a black box for people's money.

I also believe that banks are responsible for the education of their customers.

I draw a line somewhat at banks being responsible for being an arbitrator of whether something is a scam. Here is a set of criteria and here is a level of risk, and transactions that fall outside of that level of risk get flagged, whatever the customer wants to do is their decision, but that risk profile might need to be tweaked a little.
deleted
as proven in the royal commission nearly all the scams that involved banks could be easily prevented by simply checking the name on the account matches the intended target account. banks have had the ability to check since 1990. but have never taken advantage of the most powerful and effective tool to prevent virtually all scams.
I'd like to see Australia-specific stat, but in Singapore (which has the highest per capita losses to scams in the world), it's actually people in their 20-30s who are scammed the most.
The sad thing is it's not just boomers. I see allot of every generation getting done.I have even seen teens getting done in online gaming scams
That's what a society should do. Look after the vulnerable. In this case, older people are more vulnerable to being scammed.


This helps us all in the long run. Impoverished old people (or any other people) aren't something we should be seeking to have more of. 
God forbid a government actually tries to protect it’s citizens for a change.
Often the ones with huge ampunts of money too, trying to make even more rather than enjoy what they have. IDK if we will see another generation so selfish for a while.
jfc .. so what? You want banks to block fund transfers to India?  Or just fund transfers to India by older Australians? What exactly do you propose?

If the mother was not capable of handling her finances ..  the daughter should have sought orders to take over her affairs.
Yes, hence the warnings. At the end of the day, the customer insists to transfer and it’s their money, the bank can only put guard rails- what you’re asking for is the bank to control and be authoritative with your money? No thanks.

Customers need to be informed, and educated about what they are doing.
So what, you're suggesting the bank physically intervene and block a transfer of money? No thanks.

End of the day, the bank can advise the customer that this is probably a scam and it's not legitimate but the final decision must reside with the customer. If the customer is too stupid, inept or problematic to see that...then that's on them.
It would be anyone over the age of 65
I think that's because it makes it very difficult to manage their AML/CFT obligations.
It will be the end of crypto in this country.

Banks will block all transfers to the exchanges. So there will no easy on ramps anymore.
They make money from your money sitting in your account. Stop being so naive.
The individual has a lot more context on the situation than the bank on the sending side has. The bank only has limited information on the nature of the transaction, especially if the recipient has never been seen before. They can't necessarily tell that the customer was contacted by someone after clicking on a Elon Musk facebook ad

On the receiving side, yes, the bank definitely should be held responsible if they onboarded a scammer/mule
Exactly this. They already have systems in place to identify terrorism and money laundering. Adding scams to this list is reasonable.

Moving the burden of security from people (who are stupid) to banks (who are not) absolutely results in scammers losing
But they’re not allowing scams they’re allowing customers to be stupid and falling for them. I don’t think it’s fair the bank should have to cough up when someone makes a mistake, instead we need better protections to avoid scams happening. Which is difficult to do in a world where it’s easier than ever to send your money to someone who might be a stranger
>The UK did it and literally overnight the volume of scam $ being taken fell off a cliff. 

No they didn't. It comes into effect in October

There are also terms and conditions attached. Theres a cap on the reimbursement amount and also they'll deny it if the user was found negligent in securing their account.

If someone calls you pretending to be your bank and you give them your password and 2FA code, you probably won't be reimbursed
>The UK did it and literally overnight the volume of scam $ being taken fell off a cliff. 

What's your source for this? 

The voluntary scheme was largely ineffective which is why the regulators are bringing in a compulsory one but that hasn't come into effect yet and only due to start in October.
Westpac joined Optus for some initiative. This is the same Asian telco which lost loads of customer data. I’m skeptical about how effective this is and isn’t just another headline grab by both corporations that aren’t number 1 in Australia
yeah my s24u has been great. it auto flags scams and sliently drops the call before it ever rings. i was getting 10-20 a week for a year. now 0 in 6 months. but over 800 dropped "suspected scam" and 0 sms. there all in the "flagged content" section.
Some carriers automatically screen/filter it for you. Some brands of phone also do the same. We have the technology and the government could force all carries to comply with it.
Never understood why the government doesn't have a bank for people. Interest rates set at actual interest rates, they could offer Islamic style home loans where they keep the equity until it's paid off or sold. Banks bring in billions of profit every year, why doesn't the government want a piece of that
Why?

I’m an adult who buys things on the internet without using PayPal. I’m capable of assessing the risk of handing over money without getting what I paid for and making that decision for myself without expecting the bank to wipe my arse for me. 

I also transfer money to friends and acquaintances who pay for my lunch or add my items to an order they’re making, and I’m able to understand that when the money leaves my account, it’s gone. 

Why should it be more difficult to use my own money however I see fit?
That’s the thing, most here just read headlines and make biased comments, helping no one.
it is that simple. virtually all scams identified by the banking royal commission used false names with real account details such as "google" "apple" and "icloud" as banks do not check names. and banks actively fought legislation to make them check the names used matched the intended accounts.

  
i as a ANZ and NAB personal account user put the dumbest stuff as the name because its not used. i have 1000s of transactions that quite literally just have a . as the name or something like "catsatonphone"

i quite literally put the name as what ever meme i saw most recently on my commbank business account several times a day. to be clear, if the bank lets me pay 22,000 dollars to "cameleatingcarparts" and 11,000 to "catfallingoffbath" along with 6000 to "nekodragonfruit" then thats a fundamental problem with the bank becuase all 3 of those were to government bodies. (the ATO, the RTA and medicare)
I don't recall mentioning anything about age? Also using Singapore as an example would suggest Australia shouldn't do *anything* because it wouldn't make a difference?
That’s one way to bring down inflation, financial Darwinism
most of these scammers are in nations where this practice is perfectly legal. in some of these nations the scam centers are government run enterprises. and many of these nations are outside of the ability of the afp to interfere or investigate. for example. the afp has openly stated nearly all of the info they have on panama is from the panama papers leaks that named 3 prime minsters as some of australias worst of the worst for tax evasion and fraud. 

  
people seem to forget a good many of these nations have never and will never comply with international orders. panama has nearly 2 million court orders open. they have publicly burned them.
True but I also so think as long as we are a wealthy country people will want a piece of it. There's no way the cost of funding the AFP won't blow out.

The banks can work together for stricter know your customer controls. 

This can be limited to transactions of a certain value or greater. 

It's not that hard overall. And crime prevention is always more cost effective than chasing criminals.
I'm not sure what you think the internal system of a bank is doing, but they definitely do warn you when a transaction is odd. 


I work in tech and I scam reports weekly. In those cases, it's always the user allowing a transaction that they are explicitly warned not to.
> The banks own internal and intra systems are enabling the fraud, and they are the ones best placed to stop it.

This is the thing. I posted a sorry tale the other day of someone trying to trace their loss through numerous other banks where the scammers were using laundering accounts. I think it was at least nine, and up it was impossible to trace. These banks are effectively enabling the scam.
Australians lost 3 billion in scams to 2023.

I wouldn't call that a drop in the bucket.
a drop in the bucket for *them*, but a significant increase for *me* when they inevitably pass on the costs of paying out idiots who think sending all their savings to an offshore account is necessary to pay their overdue car rego despite not owning a car
Their biggest flaw is their greed.
I did, and it doesn't refer to personal responsibility.  It doesn't say anything about banks not being forced to reimburse customers who get scammed through their own actions.
Very few of the victims who contact me are functionally illiterate.

In the half hour since writing my initial message I received yet another report, this one from someone claiming to be a nominee (carer?) for someone whose myGov account was accessed and funds moved.

Some of the victims are accountants for churches, for professional businesses, etc, and fall for the scams multiple times.

I take your point, but I've been around long enough and I really do see enough of these victim reports to be able to legitimately state they're "fucking idiots".
>only if you are fully aware

I've been yelled at numerous times when I tell people to ring the company directly for this reason.
Banks literally do all of this:

* Limit for daily withdrawal
* Overseas transfer limit
* Limit of transfer to one corporation or individual
* Countries where money is transferred too regularly
* Transaction Alert level all transactions
* Transfer countries blocked (all or list)
* Exceptional transaction register with 2FA approval for amounts great than nominated amounts
* Even breaking a large sum of money down into 10 or 20 payments that can be staggered over 7 days. Only scammers would object!

You can't block payments to places like India, because a lot of legit payments go there.

The problem is people are STUPID.  I've spoken to idiots like "John" who thinks he's sending money to help with "girlfriend" in the Philippines because her house burned down, and he's about to move there blah blah.

You literally TELL him it's a known scam, but he continues to send her money, even other peoples STOLEN money and he doesn't fucking listen.

Banks can't help stupid.  And I sure as shit don't want to lose my dividends to these idiots.
It's also about what happens \*after\* the transfer. Where does the money go? It's often not sent overseas by the victim, but moves between mule accounts at different banks before disappearing.

Liability shifts could encourage the banks to get better at detecting mule accounts, and make the industry get better at spotting patterns like "this large sum moved between five accounts in the last ten minutes and now they're trying to send it to another country, seems fishy".
I can hear them now

"Banks shouldn't be able to tell us what to do with our own money"
Even just making customers activate new cards when they send them out would be a huge step up.
Yes if they have to reimburse for scams they'll make a much bigger effort to stop it happening on the first place. At the moment they don't have to bother much as it won't impact them.
its much easier. simply do what was suggested by the royal commission and legally require banks check the name on the transaction matches the account. virtually every scam the commission saw used an account that was pretending to be "APPLE INC" or "GOOGLE" or "ICLOUD" or some other scam. and people fell for it. because it looked legit and they were sending it to "Apple" or "Google" 

  
banks have been able to see the name of the receiver and sender since the 90s. yet have never made an effort to connect the two for fraud prevention.
You're forgetting the part that the customer demands the (scam) payments be made to their "girlfriend", so the bank has to actually \*deal\* with them, as well as save their money.  Plus they often have stolen funds from other people going into their account because they are helping their "partner" overseas. 

It's too much work.  Better to just get rid of them.
It’s not the banks role to police stupid.
The issue with that is you're expecting the person whose account has been limited is just going to act reasonable and accept they've been limited. The reality is that person will come screaming and shouting into a branch/on the phone making up all kinds of excuses about why they're not being scammed and the the bank is blocking them from accessing their money.
Why do you think it’s the bank’s responsibility to protect the idiot?
Idk about other financial institutions but where I work we have mandatory requirements for information for most transfers. But at the end of the day, we can't stop people from using their own money. I may refuse cash, or refuse to wire transfer something, but I can't do anything further than that. If other institutions don't have that level of duty of care in their policies and procedures, then yes, legislate around that. But if it's consistent across the board then I think anything further is really bordering on an invasion of privacy and autonomy
I've said this in another comment but the institution I work at already lists these as explicit obligations. I would lose my job if I didn't do those things. If it's different at other credit unions and banks then by all means make it law, but there should be no power for banks to make absolute decisions about how a person uses or spends their own funds
I have accounts with a couple of banks and at least one of them - I'd have to check the others - check the name on the account, so idk what you're on about. They also always check when I visit branches
Australia stats https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/research-and-resources/scam-statistics

And your Singapore numbers are very misleading... The top scam (shopping scams) by numbers is the one that affects younger people the most and also represents one of the smaller amounts.

Shopping scam is just getting the wrong item (or not getting it) off online stores like Amazon. It happens a lot but it's low value.

The second rank scam is 4x to 5x the total value of the first.
Boomers don't actually lose the most money to scams. It's generally young people that don't see inherent danger in the internet. 

They click on stuff and use things they shouldn't without thinking because they actually trust the apps/devices they are using to have security and will protect them. They over trust technology.

On the other hand older generations have a tendency to not trust technology as much particularly because they grew up seeing it evolve and was a bit of the wild west for a while (still is)
In my country 90% of the wealth is concentrated in the 70+ age bracket.


They get scamed because their current wealth was happenstance and temporally advantaged, they think it just comes that easy.


So why not make even MORE using life savings?
Take a look around
This would be effectively subsidising scam victims with charging younger people higher rates
Painting an entire generation based on the unfortunate actions of a very few . 

 Is there any path to end the perpetuation of this flawed analytical ignorance?  

All boomers = selfish ? greedy? dumb?

Such a tired trope.

Do you have any idea of who are those volunteers staffing the food banks?  meals on wheels?  soup kitchens?  handicapped transportation?

Drop in and find out.
Looks like whatever gen you belong to is having a run at it.
Imagine what would happen if a bank declined to make a transfer in the hope of looking out for the customer. They would be raked along the coals with accusations of controlling money. Like I get that scams are really worrisome now but the banks often do look out for their customers.
Oh yeah, the people with all the capital. I’m sure banks will be turning away all those cash assets. /s
For crypto it's also scams cause it's an easy way to have the money go out.
They already block most and make you feel like a criminal when you try. And don't even bother trying to withdraw any money you made, banks will close that account if they think it's a risk
Well, they used to make money from other things too. Now that they can't they just don't do those other things. And technically, they make money by lending out your money at a higher rate. Your money sitting in their account is a liability for them which costs them money. Duh doi. 
The bank can use heuristic data and pick out suspicious transactions, notify/consult with their customers, and explain why they think it might be fraud, before processing.


Someone who only does about $500 worth of transactions locally suddenly sending $8K to an overseas bank account? That should be a flag. A local account suddenly receiving tens of thousands of dollars in a day when previously it only saw a a few thousand go in a month? That should be a flag. 


It is perfectly within the capability of the banks to establish what is "normal" for most people (as people tend to be creatures of habit), and mark what is unusual behaviour for additional examination. 
I have seen the UK reimbursement scheme mentioned a few times and its pretty much always overstating what they are doing

They say that the UK is  now reimbursing all scammed funds. 

As you said, it starts in October so not in effect now, theres a cap on the funds reimbursed and if you're found negligent then you wont get it back
This software isn't being developed by Optus or Telstra.  It's being developed by a non-retail facing carrier and I've seen it in action.  It is remarkably effective.  

It is however processor intensive currently and would require huge amounts of compute resources to scale.

What I was completely unaware of until I saw this in action was how complex these scams can be.  The one I was shown had at least 7 phone calls, involving 3 different scammers working as a team over a 4 day period.  With perfect vision it was easy to spot all the scam tricks put in, but each step was done really slowly and in a way that kept the pressure on the victim.  They ended up getting complete access to his accounts and they cleaned him out, took a couple of hundred grand out of an offset account, max drew down his credit cards and emptied his savings.

The worst part of the whole thing was him realising what had happened as his accounts emptied and hearing it in his voice.
On iPhone with scam messages, you can "delete and report as scam", I'm not sure how effective it is though.
yeah the s24u auto filters scam calls and texts using the google apis. its stopped 100% of scam calls and texts for me for the last few months.
The Commonwealth government can open a bank. We should call it the Commonwealth Bank. Oh wait...
They did, and then some gov will take power and privatise to sell it off.
Personally, if we had a public bank I’d rather it not do any loans at all. Just hold my money with no monthly fee, don’t do any interest or savings, don’t charge card or withdrawal fees, no credit cards only debit, and if overdrafts happen, don’t put a fee on them but do prevent further withdrawals until fixed.

A public bank should be a safe place to put your money as it is a survival need. If you want to play the money game and deal with interests and debt and loans and credit and so on, use the private banks which do a lot more than just hold onto your money. Ideally, a public bank is not a for profit business, it just exists, taxpayer funded, and isn’t trying to make billions every year.
>Banks bring in billions of profit every year, why doesn't the government want a piece of that

Because the banks don't want them to be, that's why they pushed for the govenernment to sell the common wealth bank
I'm saying that there isn't a magic bullet solution to scams like you imply because scammers will always figure out a way to exploit that over any specific change to how payments are verified. If there was, the Singapore government, with all its intellect, vested interest and power over a bank they directly control, would have closed that loop by now. And yet scams here continue.

There's a saying among con artists that you "can't con an honest John". Scammers will always try to leverage things like your own greed to get to you, something that's been true forever and still holds true today.

And I mention age because there's always this notion that only old people are affected by scams when, in the Singapore context at least, the people who stereotypically *should* know about scams and *should* know about things like TFA and not giving your banking details online etc are actually getting scammed the *most*.
If stupidity and social engineering can be prevented then yeah I would agree. Financial education isn’t taught, and fin lit is based on your environment which means you can pick up bad habits. I think spending money there would get bang for the buck
There was an article a few months back of an elderly lady claiming that the bank was at fault for her being scammed. She had apparently sent the scammer something like 9 different OTP codes. The ones that EXPLICITLY state do not ever share this code

I have one from Up in my messages and it states "DO NOT SHARE THIS CODE. STAFF WILL NEVER ASK FOR THIS CODE" in all caps and then the code. Stupid people think that they're smarter than the systems put into place to protect them.
>I'm not sure what you think the internal system of a bank is doing

I assume twirling moustaches and laughing while holding bags of money?

>it's always the user allowing a transaction that they are explicitly warned not to.

As well as the banks, I think social media should bear responsibility. They are channels for many scams. Broader systems for trust may be required.

> work in tech and I scam reports weekly.

And I am aware there is a lot of work going on, but is that work actually mitigating the *scale* of the problem? I don't think it is.
They enabled the scam by allowing transfers to happen? I really don’t understand what you expect the banks to do, they already warn customers and block transactions when they look suspicious
CommBank mane over 10b, WBC over 7, and that's just 2. No not a drop, more like a cup. But they ain't going bust.
People are also not realising that this doesn't just affect their other customers, it affects all shareholders - which would be almost every Australian who has a super balance. It infuriates me to see more tax than I pay in a year go to someone as a result of someone in the government fuck up. It'd be even more so to see stupid people not get punished for their stupidity but for everyone else to pay for it.
So, you're OK with the banks taking money from you to increase their profits.  But you want to blame it on the people scammed rather than inadequate protections by the banks themselves.  They could have account name and number matching.  Other countries do it.  They could have decent 2-factor, other countries do it.  The telecomms could have decent account protections to stop SIM fraud.  But you just blame it on people badly served by big companies.
It also doesn't say anything about banks being forced to reimburse customers who get scammed through their actions.

It actually talks about banks taking responsibility and liability when they are negligent, and when they enable fraud by failing to detect things like compromised mule accounts.

There's absolutely nothing in there about blanket compensation. Just about making banks take the hit when they've fucked up.

But sure, you go ahead and tilt at those windmills and tell us all about the moral hazard of compensating fraud victims, while completely ignoring the moral hazard of banks not being on the hook for their screwups.
Yes, such a simple thing is neglected I am afraid
banks don't check names. nearly all the big ticket scams reviewed by the last commission saw that banks did nothing to prevent clearly fraudulent transactions paid to "apple inc" "google" "icloud" and so on. despite knowing the name of the receiver and sender and knowing the money was intended for someone totally different they have never once acted. and actively refused to enforce name checks.

its trival to perform a scam if you have access to a bank account you dont own and a printer. you simply mail out bills with say "agl energy" or "red energy" and people pay  them. because its a legit looking bill being paid to "red energy" or "agl energy" email too. since many services do not secure adresses with end to end. allowing you to send out emails as red energy with legit looking bills and payment info. and get away with it.
Except the banks restrictions don't always work. It stopped me spend $250 in Myer in my home suburb, yet allowed 3 lots of $600 get transferred to Kazakhstan without any notification. I mean there is nothing to link me to Kazakhstan.
> but he continues to send her money, even other peoples STOLEN money

Then detecting that his account is being used as an intermediary will be part of this?

Maybe you can't stop 'John' sending his own money. But you can detect that someone else's money went through four different accounts which had been oddly dormant for months before, and then hit John's account before he sent it overseas. Those other victims might see a benefit.
That's actually a really good point.

All of the current focus is on the bank that allowed the victim to make the transfer.

Meanwhile, the recipient bank should be able to immediately come up with the stolen money they received; if they can't locate it then they are entirely complicit in facilitating the transfer of stolen funds and absolutely should be held liable for that.
But each bank is independent. Once money passes from CBA to ANZ and then to Suncorp, whose responsibility is it to monitor it after that, and who has the responsibility to call it out as suspicious (bearing in mind that if you hold up a legitimate transfer you will have very angry customers)? All that data sharing massively increases security risks of a data breach and it is unrealistic to imagine that a bank can work out a rule that will accurately distinguish between legit transfers and dodgy ones. Selling a house, for example, you might have a series of transfers down the chain, possibly via escrow accounts, that when the first transaction happens it triggers a series of other transfers. I'll be damned if I end up screwed because Bendigo Bank flagged part of my chain as suspicious and blocked my buyer from paying me.

It's very simplistic to think that all bank accounts have simple patterns of in/out payments and that anything outside those parameters can be blocked automatically. (And it would be disproportionately expensive to require manual investigation of "suspicious" activity when we live in a 24/7 society and payments can be time-critical.)
but come on, the banks do all this already but I had to fly to Australia for the sole reason to set up a bank transfer for buying a house in Spain. I had all the sale contract, source of my funds, my passport, my mum went into the branch, etc. All for nought and I had to fly back in person.
"freedom for our money"
I remember an ad from decades ago that went "But it's YOUR money!"
Go on any crypto sub reddit, they scream this at the top of their lungs.
At some point the bank will probably make you sign a form that acknowledges that they have judged the transaction to be a scam, that this was communicated to the customer and they still want to proceed.
While I agree making the banks somewhat liable could help reduce certain risks.

I just see some people being de banked entirely, or tons of legitimate transactions being slowed down, flagged every time or just basically banned.

It’s annoying as me and my wife are both from overseas and have at times received and mads SWIFT payments overseas to actual family.
There was a post recently I saw on reddit (possibly r/ausfinance) where someone was upset with ANZ because they locked their account after trying to send a large amount to their sister internationally

I dont know if they were actually trying to send that money to their sister or not, but if banks are going to be forced to pay back scammed funds, there will be a lot more posts like those complaining the banks aren't letting them have access to their own money
I don't.  I was questioning the claim that "is the only way to protect the idiots".

I think it's reasonable for the bank to protect themselves by kicking them out,  but I also think the bank should be honest about their actions.
I think this is rather nuanced. I agree it could be a matter of making it more consistent or making it more concise or expanding on it. The only way to judge this is to see what the suggested would be and how reasonable it would be.  
 
I heard the other day and I am not sure how true this is, that an account was opened at a bank with a photocopy of id, not the original. That account was used for neufarious purposes, that is a breach of current processes but the bank should be held liable for all money which was lost. These types of mule accounts are problematic I gather and probably need looking into. This is the nuanced part, it isn't stopping people from transferring money that is the problem, rather it is the identification of these situations for example.
deleted
i have accounts with anz nab and commbank business. they have never checked the names. ive run 50,000+ dollars in a month through to things like "camels eating car parts" (RTA) and never had a problem with the business account. ive never once used the right name on both my personals. i honestly dont think ive ever even come close.

regardless that was the key finding of the banking royal commission. that checking names would prevent nearly all digital and physical scams. because scammers use legit accounts with the wrong names for the vast majority of electronic scams and we as a nation actively allow it.
im talking about online scams and mail out scams. banks have always had the ability to check the account holders name if asked. they simply do not. becuase that would require they add a single automated check to use the data they have on hand since 1990.
I have to disagree, the older generations do lose a lot . They trust brand names and scammers play on this. The scammer play the long game with the older people and get money out of them in larger amounts over longer periods,  The younger generation fails fast and for smaller amounts. $50 steam gift cards is very common
That isn't true at all
https://www.scamwatch.gov.au/research-and-resources/scam-statistics
You'll be paying for their pension and housing if they don't have their own money. We all benefit when scams are stopped because money in the hands of overseas criminals is not money that's in Australia. 
The way they vote suggests otherwise.

Anyways it's reddit. I'm being hyperbolic, while also aware of the statistics that show exactly what the divide is and who's driving it.
Yeah lol, you can’t totally protect stupidity sometimes. The number of Relationships scams are just mind blowing, people actually believe they’re in a relationship with Ryan renolds and willingly send money to a millionaire
They won't have any cash assets when they send it all to their overseas "fiance" who they've never actually met.
>They already block most and make you feel like a criminal when you try.

It's not unwarranted. Even if you're not being outright scammed, the entire premise of "investing" in crypto is basically trying to scam someone else. It's like investing in Madoff’s scheme despite knowing it was a Ponzi - everyone knows that crypto is worthless and has no value. Everyone engaging with it is just playing musical chairs and hoping someone else will be their exit liquidity.
Has that been a recent development? I never had any issues two or three years ago. I'm out of it now though. I guess it depends on the bank
No need to be a dick, especially when you’re wrong. It’s invested. The reason if everyone goes to the bank tomorrow to withdraw they can’t do it.
They already do this to the best of their ability, but the false positive rates on many of these data points are too high to reasonably act on. What may seem like a slam dunk might be something like a 50:1 genuine to scam ratio, which isn't worth acting on due to customer impact and the time/resource cost to the bank

Abnormal spending or inbound payments is also pretty common in the overall population and usually isn't an indication of a scam or fraud

The bank can only guess what is risky based on the information it has and the extent of how abnormal the behaviour is, whereas the individual can stop and think why a random stranger is asking for their money
As someone already said banks already do this. 

Have read countless comments on reddit about how much bank staff get abused by customers when the staff member is telling the customer they are getting scammed. 

The customer doesn’t care and think the staff member is lying. The scammers tell the customer that “the bank is in on it” and to tell them a different story than what is really happening.
>and if you're found negligent then you wont get it back

The banks have to prove that the victim was grossly negligent, just being negligent isn't enough. Also it doesn't apply to vulnerable customers.
This comment needs to be at the top. It’s apparent from too many of the comments here that many people are naive about the nature of some scamming operations.
Even good software can be implemented poorly, so I’m still sceptical.
For example,

> With the help of the bank, the detective quickly discovered Jenny's money had been transferred to 11 "money mules" with BankWest and Westpac accounts.

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-05-24/jenny-lost-300000-to-remote-access-scam-commonwealth-bank/102263542

In this example (pulled out randomly) the Bankwest and Westpac accounts enabled the scammed monies to travel through their systems unhindered. Likewise -

> Mrs Spring said her money was transferred to a Westpac account and on to almost a dozen other Australian banks before becoming untraceable, and her subsequent appeals for information have been denied "for privacy reasons".

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-06-23/canberra-woman-loses-million-dollars-to-scam-banks-regulation/104010742

Scammers use money mules who cleanse the scammed funds for the actual scammers -

https://afp.gov.au/news-centre/media-release/melbourne-man-charged-helping-launder-tens-millions-cybercrime-victims

They can even be people who were themselves previously scammed -

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-02-22/gold-coast-elderly-woman-launders-400k-in-romance-scam/102008820


> An elderly woman scammed of her life savings has been sentenced to jail after laundering almost $2.4 million – for scammers – in a bid to recover her lost funds.

https://www.qlsproctor.com.au/2023/09/scammed-woman-laundered-2-4million-for-other-scammers/

The banks need to be held responsible also for how their own systems operate. If it looks like costing them, they’ll step up quick smart.
haha classic reddit 

person A: i like oranges

person B: so you are just ok with all the genocide happening in sudan?!?! and are happy to blame it on poor hard working nurses???

no im not ok with banks profit and no im not absolving banks of guilt. the banks/telcos definitely should require what you suggest, im just saying that a blanket "banks should pay out" is dumb because, whether we like it or not, idiots will still be idiots and banks will pass those costs to us. a more reasonable policy would be to require to protections you mentioned.
No one argues that banks shouldn't take responsibility if they are negligent.

Everywhere else this has been rolled out involves the banks being forced to cover when old mate sends his life savings to his internet "girlfriend", even after the bank and others have tried to warn him.

Which results in higher fees for customers.

The vast bulk of scams are the result of the customers ignoring all advice, ignoring all warnings and getting themselves in a mess.
Banks do detect it.  You only hear about the cases they miss.  multi millions are saved DAILY by banks.  I saved a few hundred thousand myself a day at times.  People are working hard at this.

But there are cases the system/people don't pick up quick enough.  Then rules are written into the program to detect it next time, but scammers try new tricks all the time etc.

And fucking idiots who hand over all their login details to people they've never met on the phone make banks jobs even harder.  Banks bend over backwards to save stupid people's money, but some people don't help themselves.
This is already done with multiple authentication steps. I had to come to the branch in person to transfer money to Spain. (I had my mum in the branch verifying it was me wanting to transfer and I had sent the house contract - nope only way was to fly to Australia.
100%, this will get worse if banks are forced to pay people for scams.  Everything will get 50x harder for people who just want to do regular banking.  You'll barely be able to make a $500 payment without jumping through 12 hoops.
They absolutely do. Every time I enter a BSB and account number, it tells me whether or not the name I've provided matches the details. Idk what you're on about
Yeah, so their selfishness either way will cost us. Either through the bank or through the government. A country built for keeping the most fortuitous generation in our history as comfy as can be. 


Imagine the next generations plan is just a bullet to the head? Statistically they have 5x less wealth and house prices are 20x the wage compared to 3x from dacades ago. 


Decades of being told to spend less while they burn cash on luxuries.


It's not the impoverished that scammers are making bank on. It's from people who have had money and property come to them in a timely, resonable fashion, they don't protect it like they poured their whole life into it when it comes to scams, only when passing it on to their society through voting for policies
You're right but with cost of living and housing issues, what choice are we given? We have to make money somewhere, and most of us aren't being paid enough
Depends which bank. CBA yes, ING seem to allow it for me though.
Nothing of what you wrote the banks don’t already know and act on. I also don’t see anyone proposing any solution to fox this. 

The banks don’t know the money coming into their accounts is from a scam or not, to them it’s just money being transferred around. It’s not as though the scammers are putting ‘from a scam’ as the transfer description. You could argue maybe they should put a hold on money that gets transferred but that will just piss off everyone else who hasn’t been scammed. 

As for mules I know they’re an issue but the problem is with identifying them. Usually people are either regular joes who are complicit with the scam and sell them bank access onto scammers or people are using stolen ID. Neither of which there’s an easy solution to stopping. You can add a liveliness check but that will only stop stolen IDs there’s nothing you can do if some idiot grandma lets scammers use her account.
> No one argues that banks shouldn't take responsibility if they are negligent.

**Everyone** here that is saying "OMG this is terrible" is arguing that. Including you.

The measures in the speech are all about getting the bank to tighten up their systems and stop things like mule accounts being possible, stop money disappearing without a trace and get better about prevention. Not just handing out money like candy.
They don't detect enough, with billions still disappearing this way.

There's more that can be done, especially in cross-bank traceability, so there's more than just blank faces when people ask "so where did it go?".

The proposals are not so much about protecting "John", they're more about giving the banks financial incentives to up their game on detection. It's not just about stopping the "fucking idiots" from giving up the cash in the first place, it's what happens afterwards that they seem to get so wrong.
Yeah I remember CBA asking questions when I changed my home loan and I had about 80k left over in the offset.

They were just making sure I wasn’t a scam risk but it could be super annoying if you had legitimate business always put on hold for a few morons (who I do feel bad they gets scammed, but why do people believe anyone online or on the phone)
they 100% dont. i have never once with commbank nab or anz ever had that option. hell the name field on anz accounts is optional. eg i typed random numbers set the name as purplecatpoopingonpaperwork and its 100% fine with it. [https://imgur.com/a/ugzn9a1](https://imgur.com/a/ugzn9a1) despite it both being an invalid name and invalid account details. it happily let me send a dollar to said likely invalid details.

  
much the same as my buiness account let me send 10000s of dollars to camelseatingcarparts not a month ago. which is a joke name in the family for the RTA.
The banks can be incentivised to prevent the bulk of it from happening, and are much better equipped than the government to do so.


Also, not all baby boomers are wealthy. About 25% of them don't have enough wealth to properly retire. The fact that some people are wealthy isn't an argument to not implement a fraud protection system that protects everyone. 
You can certainly do better pattern matching on "This moved between three accounts at different institutions and then tried to leave the country".

And you can make the banks liable for people opening accounts with fake ID. And you can try to identify accounts which have been compromised, which are showing unusual activity etc. You can also correlate this stuff across

There's a lot more the banks can do, and making them liable for negligence in this area will give them a boot up the arse to get on it.
Because the article is not clear that it only applies in cases where the bank is negligent.

Making banks responsible for THEIR OWN actions or lack thereof, no problems.

But making banks responsible for the actions of others, such as their customers ignoring warnings and getting scammed - that's what people have a problem is.

Perhaps if the Grauniad was clear in their writing, or if the Ministers office was clear in their press release, people wouldn't get the wrong impression (if it is indeed wrong)
You're right, that's the real problem.  Where does the money go?  It goes overseas.  The bank can see where it goes.

So tell me, whose job is it to get the money back from the bank in India?  The bank can and DOES request it to be returned, but they have no actual power.  And is it the banks job to chase stolen funds internationally??

The problem lies with the POLICE.  They do NOTHING.
Yeah I don't think people realise the inconvenience it would cause for ALL of us, you won't be able to buy a new cellphone/laptop/jewelry/tickets for a show without a phone call from the bank.

Transfers to anyone?  blocked until you've been spoken to.  New bill payment?  blocked until you've been checked.  Which could take hours because the bank is checking all the other transactions  made across Australia....
[removed]
[removed]
[Here you go.](https://i.postimg.cc/pTthccPz/Smart-Select-20240731-215945-Comm-Bank.jpg) You are incorrect.

I even went and used a Commonwealth account for you.
All good points.
>You're right, that's the real problem. Where does the money go? It goes overseas.

But it often goes through several 'mule' accounts before it gets there. That's explicitly called out in the speech, better destination checks, better mule account detection.

>So tell me, whose job is it to get the money back ...

That's the point. It's the bank's job to get better at spotting the intermediate accounts and the overall movement pattern, so nobody has to try to get it back from India in the first place.

Yes, it would be nice if the police did more than sit on their hands.
Your [comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/1eg7nbu/labor_vows_to_force_banks_to_compensate/lfstehp/?context=3) in /r/australia was automatically removed because you used a URL shortener or content cache.

These are not permitted in /r/australia as they impair our ability to enforce link blacklists.

Please re-post your comment using direct, full-length URL's only.


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Your [comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/1eg7nbu/labor_vows_to_force_banks_to_compensate/lfstioa/?context=3) in /r/australia was automatically removed because you used a URL shortener or content cache.

These are not permitted in /r/australia as they impair our ability to enforce link blacklists.

Please re-post your comment using direct, full-length URL's only.


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
had my commbank account since 2013, never seen that. my nab is a 2008 account. my anz a 2013. my parrents have had commbank accounts since the 70s my grandma there the day the branch opened in the 40s. the branch manager was there when my mother was born. 

  
ive never once seen that. hell ive never once had a transaction flagged and ive never used a legit name on one. nothing that could ever be considered close to a name infact. so agree to disagree. 

  
double so since the commonwealth bank was named directly as the WORST offender for not checking names in the royal commission. 

  
[https://www.royalcommission.gov.au/banking](https://www.royalcommission.gov.au/banking) 

  
so agree to dissagree.
Mule accounts are spotted and picked up all the time.  Again, it's like crime in the communities, majority of it is stopped or deterred - but it still happens.  Some of it gets through.  

Some banks are better than others, I used to ring ING to stop some stolen funds and was told they don't have any fraud staff on at the weekends??  Some of the smaller banks are hopeless.

A lot of scams you hear about are greed driven.  Some old Boomer thinks he's found an amazing investment company for his life savings with 30% returns, and you tell him this sounds dodgy ASF but he's yelling he's "done his research, he's an ex accountant" blah blah, then he rings up months later and said it was a scam and wants his money back.  Do you think the bank should pay him back?
Mate I just fucking went into the commbank app and typed out a transfer. There's no agree to disagree here, that's what popped up. You're off your rocker
