I’m curious as to how may people use Gumtree anymore or has everyone migrated to Marketplace? 
I've bought motorcycles off there but you have to convince the sellers almost all the time you're not a scammer. When I've gone to sell things I get scammers within a few hours of it going live.
I feel that it has declined as well, but I don't see it go any lower than it is now.

Why? Facebook got popular because Gumtree was full of scammers.

Well, now the scammers are on Facebook, lifting Gumtree up, but becoming just as bad.
Yes. Bring back the trading post. The paper one not on line
I could not even give away stuff for free on Gumtree without issues and scammers.
I think it's still alive for cars and bikes.

Marketplace has a lot of wishful thinkers.  Gumtree allows you to get a reasonable idea of the market pretty quickly.
My useless hobby is reporting scammers advertising on Marketplace. Pretty much 95% of ads for Murphy beds are a scam on there. But FB don’t give a shit. 

Like everyone gumtree scammers are into you as soon as you post. Got too tedious to deal with them.
IS THIS STILL AVAILABLE?
Was finding it hard to sell stuff on gumtree for a while so moved to marketplace…. But it’s gotten so bad dealing with people I’ve moved to eBay never thought I would ever sell my stuff there but I rarely have to deal with people asking stupid stuff or lowballing.

Even with eBay taking a 25% cut I’m still selling stuff that I haven’t had luck in a long time and also probably make still more than on marketplace due to the unrealistic haggling. Thing gets sold I print a postage label take it to po to send it off. No bs about will you travel to me etc
I bought something off gumtree last weekend.  Its still alive.
It sucks for cars now, filters dont always work and as they charge for cars people are putting them in odd categories to avoid paying
I still use it to buy rarer types of fish from local breeders (for aquariums not for consumption).
Yep, posted ad today, 2 very convincing scams Via messages in gumtree telling Me to send details of paypal to gumtree link, dodgy as.
I couldn’t even give good things away.. Only responses were scammers. 
Yes. It’s over.
Gumtree like Ebay is dead because of greed. 

Greed for fees along with  ridiculous prices " its not made any more its worth as much as King Tuts golden mask" 

Second hand books that you used to see for 5 dollars, people now want 60 bucks for useless out of print books that are not even collectable.  

Even if you go to the op shop or the recycling centre shop they price everything like you a millionaire and everything in their shops are rare antiquity collectables.

 The internet research tool has turned dumb people into stupid people with their inflated sense of greed.  

Op-shops used to sell books for 2 to 5 dollars each. Now you go in there and they have priced to some flawed model that says the book is worth triple the old cover new price from the publisher. Any shit book is now a masterpiece of literature! 

Then it does not help that "ebayers" cruise these shops paying these stupid prices then put it on ebay for more which inflates the greed "researched" price

All the 80's electronics mostly crap that came out of Japan now all of sudden is priced like gold nuggets.  Stuff that should be selling from 5 to 50 dollars people want 200 to 500 for old Sanyo mass market crap.  " Its old its gold" in their minds.

There is also a greedy non reality in Australia in general on what secondhand items are worth, just no clue combined with greed. People expect to almost get the price they paid for the item 10 years ago. The same goes for cars. People expect you to pay out their car loans and just peg secondhand car prices at stupid levels. 

There is also a new trend where people just take old prices and double them if  the item is few years old. 

Then you have a new generation of Auction companies selling off crap to equally stupid buyers who expect then to double it again. Its a lost cause buying  secondhand stuff in Australia. 

The Americans have a better sense of balance when it comes to secondhand worth, except on Ebay. However postage prices has ruined this  game as well.

Frankly speaking you might just as well forget everything secondhand in Australia. Its a total rip off regardless of which way you want to look at it. Just buy new and get better for about the same price!

You really need your head read if you buy secondhand, everybody seems to want to rip you off or make them rich.

And lets not forget the joke of the century, secondhand crap from China  whose worth is the same as something new or made in Europe or the USA. The drugs that these people are on must be good!
Used to sell stuff on Gumtree.

After a while stuff that sold well would just sit and collect dust. Realised that my listings were basically invisible unless I paid for them. Eventually unrelated content would even appear above my listings.

Typical case of trying to monitize their platform once volume peaked.

Now I sell on Marketplace but am beginning to see the same issue. 

It's a never ending loop.
Gumtree is so filled with scammers that I hardly find it useful at all anymore. This goes for either buying or selling. Buying you're suspicious because 90% of sellers are scammers, selling you have to bend over backwards to convince the buyer you're legit.

Marketplace has scammers too, but not nearly as many as Gumtree. Especially on local community pages you'll be able to find something legit most of the time.
I look at Gumtree, occassionally find bargains. Some bloke sold me a server for $50, was so old few were interested. But it had a tape drive in it worth $200.
Craigslist, the US free classifieds, is very much alive and well and completely dominant.

Not sure what the difference is. CL only charges for a few types of listings, which they sort of have to charge for or it would be overrun with spam — vehicles, jobs, couple of other things. Some difference there? Better moderation?
Put a few things up the other week, only got scammers. Marketplace blows, but it's still the least worst option
Left the platform after finding out I can’t block sellers.

In particular, there’s an automotive seller that spams his car listings (named Mr. Car lol) that comes up in every search because of the stupid keywords he includes in the listing description. Could be looking for S2000-related items but will be hit with his shit Jeep ad
I don't use marketplace or facebook in general.

gumtree was good a few years ago but fucked now

ebay was good many years ago but fucked now.

I just shop in real shops these days.
It's good to get an idea of what's out there.  Especially for stuff that's outside of my state/town. 

There are scammers on both platforms.  Used to use eBay back in the day when it was people selling stuff, but now it's businesses selling stuff.  

Marketplace does seem to have a few more users selling than businesses.
Is Gumtree dead? Absolutely.

Shocking for selling cars, just scammers and bots.
I won the t shirt "I got ripped off by an old lady on Gumtree"
I’m trying to offload some crap including a display katana I bought at a convention a few years ago that’s been sitting in my wardrobe ever since. I couldn’t sell through Facebook since it was flagged as a weapon and a friend suggested Gumtree. I didn’t entertain that idea even briefly.
I find it more convenient to use Facebook Marketplace, as I already use Messenger/Facebook on my phone. I don't particularly like giving out my Phone # to random people.

Marketplace also integrates into FB groups/communities for buying and selling. People will be targeted with ads/gravitate to Marketplace on their phone app when they're bored, so more eyes on what I want to sell!

I can also see how old an account is, and send photos/keep records of the transaction between me and the seller/buyer. 

Facebook is just way more convenient now!
I rarely use it but have used it both times when I've bought my two dogs. 

I've only ever used FB Marketplace once and that was for a game controller I had been wanting that coincidentally showed up at a very good price.
The amount of scammers and payid schemes is staggering. Compared to even 5 years ago.
Gumtree was always ment to compete against eBay. It never wanted to go against marketplace. And they didn't prepare for it to go there
Yes
I just tried to delete my account on gumtree and it has taken me a month of back and forth with admin and it's still not deleted! It's crazy. It's well and truly dead in my opinion.
Inner west Sydney. Company bought a brand new forklift last week. My Boss had 20 offers in a a few hours on the old forklift on Gumtree. Buyer collected and paid within 5 hours on a work day.
For those who work in a sensitive role, Gumtree is good because people can't stalk you on there.

I found stuff sits there for a few weeks and then bam, someone wants it. Once you realise that, it's fine.

As for scammers, I sign of at the bottom of the ad with something like this-
__________________________________________________

Cash only. No Bitcoin or crypto or any other weird payment system that I haven't heard of before and I'm not using some sort of courier service that I haven't heard of either. 

No I'm not sending you my email address.

___________________________________________________


That has stopped scammers literally straight up although I did get one last week saying my account would be deleted if I didn't update info bla bla bla.

By the time I checked the message, Gumtree had banned the user.

So it works for me.
For me, I don't like handing out my phone number to strangers or putting it in the ad, but with Marketplace I can do all my comms through messenger direct on my phone.

I think Gumtree has their own messaging app but people have to download it on purpose, whereas most people seem to have messenger already.

Plus with marketplace I can scope out the buyer's facebook profile and usually figure out if they're a payid scammer or someone local to me.
NEVER USED IT, ALWAYS FACEBOOK MARKET PLACE OR ILD SKEWL F;YERS AT SHOPS AND SMALL TOWNS AS M RURAL AND PEOPLE READ THOSE COMMUNITY BOARDS
Sadly I think the end is near. I have loved gumtree over the years but it fails to attract as many buyers as other platforms now with social media pages seeming to be preferred. And I have sadly had to fend off and report many scammers…

‘Can I pay with payid and send brother pickup, I have business meeting out of state’ 
‘payid not working, you need to send me $ so then I can pay you’ 
Yeah f***ing right…
A little
Haven't used Gumtree since I started using FB Marketplace few years ago.
Last time I posted something on gumtree I think I got about 50 messages within a few hours of people wanting to pay more than the listed price so they can get a courier to pick it up and the extra will cover freight. Nah bro, I'm good. Cash on pick up only thanks.
Mind you I had the same experience selling a bike on Marketplace.
Facebook's current problem is that the ads need to fuck off, it's gotten so much worse lately too. It's a page of ads, a few postings, and then another page of ads... repeat
Tell him he’s dreamin’!
Every Thursday!

Something to read on the shitter.
NO GUNS IN THE HOUSE
> Pretty much 95% of ads for Murphy beds are a scam on there.

What’s special about Murphy beds of all things?
Why them?
Yes
been selling stuff on ebay since before gumtree and marketplace existed and it's still the superior platform, the fees are worth it.
Same here, I was able to move stuff on Ebay which has been sitting on gumtree / marketplace for ages. 

Yeah you get less money but so much less hassle.
I had some furniture on eBay for a month without a single bite. Put it on Marketplace and had 20 inquiries within an hour and sold it to the first person who fronted with the cash. That made me think eBay was dead. I did have a separate eBay store for a while selling new stuff which worked well I'll admit.
To your point I'm pretty sure eBay bought Gumtree years ago.
How did we get here? Flipping/ gig economy? Just pure greed? I know a few friend of friends that do this, ie posted the other day about finding in a salvos, a perfect condition, bona fide YOWIE collection. Couldn't believe their luck and was gonna make big bucks.

I was like damn, good on you. 

We're not doing well are we?
But if people are paying these prices, doesn't that justify the price?

Who dictates what something is 'worth' ?

Just because you think a 10 year old stereo system should be worth $50, doesn't mean old mate down the road does. He may be willing to pay $200. So in actually fact, it IS worth $200, to somebody.
Agree with all the above, 

BUT 

people (some people) will pay stoopid money for stoopid old shit, hence the stoopid pricing for stoopid old second hand shit.

Everyone wants to be a wheeler and dealer and get theirs.  I just wish I could put a price, a final no haggle thanks price on something I want to sell and that's that...
I’ll give you $25 for it. 
Let me guess, they worked on an oil rig?
I got paid with payId and Uber pickup before. They're not all bad.
Market place is the new gumtree, absolutely painful, soul draining if you will.
Or listing nowhere near you
I can deal with the ads.  It's the abysmal searching I can't stand.  It constantly shows me what it *thinks* I want to see, rather than results containing the specific keywords I'm searching for.  The result is endlessly swiping through noise to try and find what I want.  It keeps me in their app longer and probably shows me more ads in the process, so I guess they're achieving their goal.
Whaddya want with jousting sticks?
In the fish and chip shop on a Friday while you wait for your order to get made.
I’m buggered if I know. Maybe it worked once and they’re sticking with it. The trouble is that I’ve been looking for one for a year and am almost resigned to paying for a new one
WOULD YOU TAKE $1 FOR IT?
Ebay doesn't work for bulky items worth less than the cost of posting them. Great for smaller items like electronics. 

Gumtree is still best for finding a bargain on furniture
They sold it in 2020.
I'd rather be safe than sorry
Yes.  I'll be home waiting for you from 11am to 6pm.
Yes the online store was all postable items. The postage cost, now $10.95 with Australia Post, inflates the prices, not to mention the large chunk eBay takes. I've shuttered my store now.
