Hi all my now ex mate had my car for 2 weeks  and has racked up over 4000 dollars in fines and 16 demerit points he is on a uk licence 
I have named him as the driver on the declarations  but he won't answer my calls or texts I have gotten the car off him but I want to make sure it doesn't come back to bite me as I am a truck driver and can't lose my licence over this 
Rant over BTW this is happening in Queensland 
That’s not a friend, that’s a leech
[https://www.qld.gov.au/transport/safety/fines/how-to-transfer-a-fine](https://www.qld.gov.au/transport/safety/fines/how-to-transfer-a-fine)

Do it asap otherwise you won't be able to transfer it (within 28 days)
You need to talk to the police. Then you need legal representation because this would need to go to court. Your ex mate fucked you over.
I think “absolute cunt” is the most appropriate term for this person.
If you sent in the declaration in time, and it was correctly filled out, they'll go into his name, with or without a Queensland licence. 

I think you can check the pending fines on your TMR online account. Otherwise go into your nearest office or call them and check to make sure they're out of your name.
I'm in NSW but my Irish flat "mate" registered 3 cars in my name and the fines started coming in and the stat decs going out. Went to Service NSW to sort it out. They made one phone call to a car dealer out west and said the cars were mine! Nightmare! I eventually got hold of a sympathetic person on the phone at the newy office, sent a signed fax and the whole thing went away. At least you have his details. Good luck.
How is that even possible without actively trying to fuck you over?! 18 points in 2 weeks is absolutely insane.
Police, and nominate every fine to them.

They will not be able to leave the country without the fines being paid. If they flew before, they will not be allowed in.

Police, lawyer, nominate.
So do u have a linkt account. Because If you don't you might want to expect a toll invoice statement as well.
This has all happened within the past few days he won't answer my phone calls I have all his details picture of his licence and his address going into the cops tonight to see what they say
Parasitic cunt is the word I would use lol
Nominations are very difficult to reverse. I know someone who was incorrectly named on a fine by a car dealer and had to fight for months to get cleared.
Have you spoken to the police or the people who issues the fines?
Famous saying... Never lend your car or your partner to someone, both come back fucked.
I had a similar thing happen once. 

Let a friend borrow my car while I was overseas for a few weeks for work. Came back to find he'd taken the plates off and replaced them with some SovCit bullshit, and he'd been driving around with no licence, racking up loads of speeding fines and parking tickets, and had been transporting large quantities of weed plants to Nimbin. 

We are no longer friends and I no longer let anyone borrow my car. 

It wasn't a terribly big drama to transfer all the fines to his name, just had to fill out the stat decs. Annoying and tedious.
If you fill in his info on the fines paperwork, and supply his UK address and as much detail as possible, that should do the job. The rest is up to the law men.
That’s not a friend.
This is why you dont let people borrow your car.
R/AusLegal is probably a better sub for this
Hi mate

I'm terribly sorry about what has happened to you, it must be a kick in the guts when this so called "friend" broke the law driving you're car and now you're  getting all these fines, my advice is do everything you can to make sure this guy pays all the fines and cop the demerit  points, this is NOT your fault, it's  you're  ex mate's fault, he had you're car and he is responsible for all of this damage you don't deserve this especially in the cost of living crisis,  another advice is never let anyone drive you're vehicle, at least if you drive it , you know nothing can really go wrong. This guy is honestly not a friend at all, he honestly sounds like a scumbag, and I really hate these types of people in particular, one day something like this might happen to him.
Jesus. How many fines is that made up of? Did he do the same thing over and over by mistake or is he just a complete asshole. Wow. Once you have this sorted I would definitely start avoiding this bloke.
That’s not a friend. That’s a piece of shit!
I am invested and need an update on this.
Don't worry about everyone saying lawyer this or lawyer that..nominate him as the driver and then they send him a copy of the fine..with photo evidence of the driver. I'm assuming all the fines are from automatic speeding/red light cameras..and those all take a photo of the drivers face.
So it's just a matter of simply sending in the form with his details...and your hands are washed clean of the whole fiasco.
You need better mates!
[deleted]


Your 'mate' is an absolute prick and you should go straight to the police and tell them everything, even possibly inquire about reporting the car has stolen for that time period if he won't accept responsibility.

Also try and get as much evidence in writing text or email from your friend that he was in possession of the car for that time period before you burn the bridge with him. As that will help later if it goes to court.
Two year old account with bugger all posts or points. No replies from OP. Treat with caution.
Document everything you can that proves your story.
Many of the fines will have a photo showing the driver.

Seems they will believe you.
What a prick.
How did you go without him admitting fault? Do they still accept the declarations, or are they still planning to pursue you?
Im doubting he is your mate.
Sounds like your mate is a meth head
Had this happen one time to me when I went overseas, my friend was “nice” enough to host my 2 cars for 3 weeks. I came back to his house after the holiday, to find 1 car still there and other is not. 

After some call around, his sister’s bf had it at uni, never trusted anybody again.

The idiot, racked up 2500kms in 2 weeks for a car that would lucky to see 6000km a year, I had 5 council parking fines, 3 speeding and red light traffic fines. Luckily some was revoked and after nominating driver he admit but some he denied because his other friends drove as well so I was out of pocket 800 bucks and an earlier then usual car service. Never have I ever lend my cars to anybody even when I go oversea.
Mate, law stipulates that you cannot be convicted of a crime you can prove you didn’t commit. Write an affidavit and get it signed by a JP then say to the magistrate “I am swearing on oath that I am not guilty of what I am being charged you have a judicial duty unto the law to drop these charges or charge me with perjury.
Was your car an sv6 or a Falcon.
Doesn't he knows it's a carton per point?
In NSW you’d do that all online in service nsw, but QLD is probably backwards. 

I think, you’d have to stat dec and provide the drivers details. It would help if you can also provide evidence of your wear abouts, truck log book, recipes for paying for something on your arm card at the day time in the next council area over. 

Good luck!
You reckon he's a dickhead or just another pom not used to our super slow roads?
About 20 years ago I lent a spare car to a family friend who had come over from Fiji to do some fruit picking work.

He was unfamiliar with speed cameras and racked up 10 fines on the Tasman Bridge over the course of two weeks. 

They all arrived in one thick envelope some time after he had gone back to Fiji and I nearly had a heart attack opening it as I assumed they were my infringements.

I did a stat dec and gave them his info and they chased it up all the way to Fiji and recovered the fines. His occupation in Fiji? Police officer.
Did he get any red light fines? Can you apply for the photo to prove it’s him? Definitely contact police
Your car is stolen, is what you're saying?
I had a similar but much lighter experience. You just fill out a form detailing with the penalty company, detail who was the driver. Prove it wasn't you and it all goes away. Can you prove it wasn't you. In my case I was overseas.
What a piece of shit, definitely tell the cops
It might be easiest to get him to write a stat dec saying it was him, if you haven't burnt your bridges with him already.
On the internet
That’s what friends are for.
Never lend your car or your wife.
He doesn't care. I got pinged by a speed camera in Sydney when I was visiting relatives. I paid the fine but never got any points on my UK licence.
Community legal center.
 I was in court (witness for another matter) and a guy was in the same situation as you. Once he explained it to the magistrate, the issue was let off with a warning.  It did take a morning in court but it’s pretty common.
Report the car as stolen
In addition to above suggestions I would also consider checking your car out with a mechanic. Who knows what he's put your car through
This is precisely why I never loan any of my stuff out ,
You can transfer the fine 
https://www.service.transport.qld.gov.au/nominateinfringement/public/Welcome.xhtml?dswid=-2888
Don't these fines all have photographs taken of the driver at the time of offence?
With friends lie that...etc
Drive it like you stole it - taken literally
They usually send photos with the fines can't you dispute them and say it's not you?
If you have given his particulars in a separate declaration in each instance then that should be sufficient. 
You haven’t said anything about being summonsed, so if you’ve diligently filed decs, you should be covered. If the authorities want more or reject your declations or any of them, you’ll know.
Naturally 16 points means disqualification, so hopefully you’ve kept copies of what you’ve sent in.
So your UK friend has been setting off cameras left right and centre? Speeding? Traffic lights? Mobile phone while driving?
No apprehensions? No accidents?
Just getting caught on cameras I haven't received anything else in the post but I wouldn't be surprised if I have more when I get home from work
Yeah I'd be lodging the fines as not you instantly. If the idiot was pulled over in that same period that could also help you
You have named him as a driver. The authorities will then follow up with him at the address provided by you.
Unless they query things, you have complied with their requirements. If something does blow back I would guess that at least some of the photos  show his face (and not yours) to assist
You’ll be fine
Get a lawyer
Reason 5,888,475 why I do not lend my car to anyone.
@capitolride.

If your UK friend is resident in QUEENSLAND, your (not) friend should have swapped his UK licence for Queensland licence after 3 months.

If that is the case, you could also get him done for driving unlicensed...bonus, cunt deserves it.
If any were camera fines, you can request the pics. Usually they show the driver pretty clearly. In VIC you can get them free. If you can get pics from that period showing that it was him driving when the fine was issued, they will return your points and rescind the fines.
People are too nice. How do you let anyone drive your car at all? Noone drives mine. And 16 demerit points? This will go to court, talk to Police asap and get a lawyer, you’ll have to go to court.
...where's your question? This is a just a rambling story with no point.
You need to contact QLD Legal Aid for advice.
That is 100% coming back to you if you can't get him to admit fault otherwise everyone would be putting all their speeding fines onto their "mate from UK"
Sounds like a bullshit story, im sorry to say.

- Are you able to provide police with your UK friends full name, address and contact details? 

- Are you able to provide copies/screenshots of the emails or messages you sent to this person concerning the fines and them needing to sign a stat dec? 

- Do you have proof of your whereabouts at the exact time the offences occured?

If the answer to these questions is anything but a big YES, then the fines are totally your responsibility, no matter what you argue.

- This is exactly what the magistrate will say in court, prosecution will even make allegations that this person from the UK who you claim was driving your car does not exist and that you racked up the fines yourself and are now trying to dodge accountability and this is why you should be prosecuted with the maximum penalties!

I'm not saying this to be a jerk, this is 100% what will happen if you can't get this other person to take responsibility and you want to contest this in court, plus you will get hit with a license disqualification and loads of court fines too.
I would talk to a lawyer ASAP, they will make the process faster and hopefully make sure you can drive on a temporary license until (if) you get your points back.
Na you’re fucked. Unless you can convince him to take responsibility for it. It ultimately falls on you. 

That said. If you lawyer up. They might find something that proves it wasn’t you.
Not cool, but if he’s used to driving in the UK he’s probably not used to the roads having a speed camera every 200m and insane levels of fines. When your pensioner mum gets speeding fines, something is broken. I never realised how insane it all is till I moved overseas. I barely look at the speedo now. Edit cue the downvotes for stating the reality of Australia’s heavy handed and counterproductive enforcement. [Relevant link](https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=2BKdbxX1pDw)
Did you cheat with his girlfriend or something like that
LMAO...You loaned someone your car?...hahahahahahahahaha...sorry...hahahahahaha
That's not a leech, that's a cnut
[removed]
Also for each fine get the picture and save it, there should be a clear one showing the driver
I used to work for the Police in Australia. If ever you are going to lend your vehicle to a friend. I would a. Tell your insurance company pre loan and b. Have him sign off on a statutory declaration for the period he is borrowing your vehicle. That would be evidence of who had your vehicle at the time. Surely you still have time to transfer that liability on the ticket to him?
Can't you also pay to get photos of every offence? I'm sure in some cases it will be clear you are not the driver. It will help back your story.
And over
💯 x 💯
Neither the depth or the warmth my dude
I am just here, reading all the comments in my head with an australian accent, and this on is the best by far
I know of a person who had the fine follow them to Malaysia. I don't know if that person ever paid it but I know they received it in the mail at their Malaysian address.
You do usually get a email and or letter of confirmation once it's been transferred. 

I've had to transfer fines quite often to employees who really are trying to lose their license.
I think it may also cause them some trouble if they try and return to Australia
Well, if they're your cars, take possession and sell them.
If the cars are "yours" could you report them as stolen and try to get them given to you or at least impounded?
Hooooly shit, what a roller coaster. Tell me you called the cops on him yeah.
This would be incrediably easy to do. Especially from someone not familiar with Australia and how ruthless we are with this stuff.

If someone went past a fixed speed camera on a regular route to work  (like in a tunnel and they didn’t know it was there). 

Thats 13km over and 3 points, all it would take is 5 trips.
Speeding past fixed speed cameras would do it
[deleted]
My housemates at uni were a group of yanks, they were only here for 6 months. They bought a car from a sweet little old lady so they could drive down to Melbourne (from QLD). They didn't transfer the title, sped the whole way down, sped the whole way back, then left the country with all the fines racked up in the old owners name. Bunch of cunts, dunno what happened after but it's very easy to be a cunt without actively trying.
In the UK, the rule usually applied to speed cameras is 10% + 2. So for the 70mph speed limit (112 k/h), you can do 79 (126 k/h) and not get booked.


And that's not accounting for the leeway on the speedo, so he was probably used to doing 85 mph indicated (136 k/h) and not getting booked.


Still a dick though, and should own his mistake. Driving a friend's car is not like driving a rental. You should be extra cautious and tidy.
I accidentally racked up about $700 worth in Italy over 3 days so it's definitely possible. Didn't know you needed a permit to drive in a certain area and drove through it a few times. Didn't know until the rental company hit uo my credit card a few months later.
This. He must have been driving like an idiot
>They will not be able to leave the country without the fines being paid.

Shortcut to permanent residency
These are impossible to change... I tried and failed (you basically go around in circles).. Eventually I had to pay them.
Update?
Why would I speak to the actual people that could help when I could just speak to randoms on the internet?!
They nominated them as the driver in the forms, not sure what else there is to do?
the weed stuff to nimbin is a classic.

" I am going to make my trips to nimbin w a boot load of cannabis seedlings extra stealthy by removing the number plate and adding my own whatever the fuck instead. Cops will just know that I am with in maritime law and travelling therefore outside of the laws and the power to be fined or punished by the corporation of Australia."
How did he get speeding fines if he didn’t have plates? Sounds like he helped you by not having plates as it wouldn’t be traced back to the owner of the car?
I hope you drove him out to the bush afterwards, gave him a baseball bat treatment and then left him there.
No. AusLegal is for discussions about the Australian legal system. It absolutely and explicitly does not provide legal advice per se. For that you go to an actual lawyer.
Yes worst case it can be chosen to go to court and they have to prove who was driving. Preeeetty sure they couldn’t slug him for the fines if they can’t prove it was him, just because it’s registered to him doesn’t mean he’s actually legally responsible.
lol what will the police do? They don’t even issue the fixed camera fines. They also won’t take a stolen vehicle report because the vehicle was not stolen.
Probably a rage bait post.
Taking it to court would’ve seen it sorted because they have to prove who to fine by who drove and you had proof you were out of the country.
No honda civic
5 cartons mate
There will be photos of the driver available if they got pinged by seatbelt / mobile phone cameras.
u dont get points on your uk licence 

its actually a little cheat u can do here if u are from overseas is just always drive on your foreign licence w a international permit as well.

why. points. 

Sam Burgess who played league for souths got a way with driving on a British licence for the better part of a decade and his driving record was horrendous but he just paid the fine and didnt get points as that's not possible for Australian offences to apply to a British licence.
I have time sheets from work  text messages from the fella that was driving the car witnesses to say both that he had my car and that I was at work  
I have all his details  including his address here in Australia  the only thing I never go him to sign was a statutory  declaration  to say he was the driver  but if he was to sign one now would It still be valid
“Sounds like a bullshit story”, “I’m not saying this to be a jerk”. 
Yeah, you are!
Points back? No points have been assigned yet.

No lawyer necessary.

Temporary licence? What are you smoking.
Have you been to the UK? He’s definitely used to it if he has driven there in last 10 years. In 2020 the UK had 6,942 cameras compared to 1,335 in Australia.
What road has a camera every 200m?
> When your pensioner mum gets speeding fines, something is broken.

Presumably it's her speedo that's broken
That’s not a cnut that’s literally a conman criminal.
This. And if the picture isn’t clear you can request the other photos. The info is on the fine itself. 

I had the same thing happen to me (with only 1 fine though). Lent the car to a mate visiting from the UK. They copped a fine so I did the stat dec and that was the end of it. I did need to know their address in the UK though. Just make sure you get onto it asap and keep all the documentation in one place, for a couple of years in case it ever comes back on you as it slowly moves through the system. 
Where’s does one get a statutory declaration for signing from?
You know absolutely no one is going to lend vehicles to people if they feel the need to go through this. 

This is about as useful as telling someone “you should have invested in bitcoin when it first come out.”
I mean, if you feel you need to do all that just to lend a friend your car, then maybe don't lend them the car and get better friends at the next available opportunity.
Ticket???
You need everything. Even the texts sent to him showing you had no idea what was going on.
ten thousand percent cunt
There was a yank on here a few weeks ago complaining about his mobile phone fine.
I had one follow me from France. 130kmh in a 110kmh zone. Was 40€ and cost me ~$80AUD on the conversion.

We have some absolutely fucked fines over here.
Easier said than done. Didn't know where they were. Tony was a bit rough too, so...
That's not a bad idea. But then I'd be on the hook for all the fines.
Cops? No. I'm in Sydney. They don't help with that sort of thing.
If in Qld, 20km over and the subsequent ones become double demerits double fines.
Yep. Moved here from Canada and it’s the norm to go 10km/h over the speed limit in non-residential areas. A cop wouldn’t pull you over doing 10km/h over even if they got you on radar. Seriously whatever the speed limit is, add 10. We also don’t have speed cameras in BC so not something you’d worry about.

Adjusting to the roads and non-stop cameras in Sydney was tough. Everyone mostly does exactly the speed limit save for the odd dickhead driver. 

I could definitely see someone racking up a pile of speed cameras tickets if they didn’t know they were on their route. Waze is your friend.
Also the ‘friend’ is apparently British. It’s not unusual for the motorways over there to flow at 135-145 kph and have that be ‘normal’. On a lot of stretches the police tolerate it. 

Sticking to 100 or 110 would probably feel abnormally slow. So they probably broke the law *constantly*.
This is the actual problem. If you can casually, without ill intent, unknowingly, rack up thousands in fines, it means the *law* is fucked. Not the person.
Yep. Especially in school zones.
Wow that's nuts needing a permit. Where was that?
Until fines paid.....then bye bye
*insert crime here* should I a) report it to the police, or b) post on reddit about it?

B.

It’s always B
>speak to police  
>yeah nah nothing we can really do aye  
>but if they do it again let us know
Like the people who ask if stuff is discontinued... *why would random people know*
That's where *asking the right people* is a good idea. They will know if there is anything else that needs to be done.
Fucking cookers 🙄

I live loving in northern NSW, but sometimes I really hate it 🤣
Broke the #1 rule. 

Never break the law while you’re breaking the law.
i like that you used the word 'corporation'

we are the only publicly traded government in the world.
Pulled over. Yes there were arguments with cops. There were also fines for driving without plates and unregistered etc. Tbh it's a miracle the car wasn't impounded or something. And there were some camera fines from the first could of weeks before he took the plates off
Nope. He's still friends with my ex husband 🙄 they deserve each other
Aus legal is for getting a bunch of people to call you a moron and to go get a lawyer. 
I agree to see a lawyer for legal advice but they do give opinions on avenues you can take for instances like these.
Surely they'd at least point someone in the right direction - who to contact.
The police aren't going to do anything  initially except record your reports, but you kind of have to talk to the police to report it.

When in future you end up in court trying to sue your friend you can refer back to the legal statements that were made as part of the compiled evidence.

It also helps to put out an alert of the situation so you don't get arrested by a random patrol car on the highway because you have 17 speeding tickets against your number plate.
Didn’t know any smarter as I was still young back then on my ps 🥲
Best of luck in court
Not at all. This is exactly what this person will be told in court by the Magistrate.

Yes, the law is unjust
They have to pin it on someone, and if OP can’t get old mate to own up they just dock them from OP right?
Wow. It has changed since I was there. TIL.
Ooh so when I was doing 90 mph on  the M1 a few years back (heading up North) I was probably caught... hmm. I had people overtaking me so I figured it was ok 😆 In fact the lack of spped limit signs on Uk motorways surprised us.
They pulled all the speed cameras where I live now a few years back. Do you know what happened to the road toll? That’s right, *nothing*.  The cops shouted it would be carnage. The sky will fall! Literally zero change. Perhaps we should spend more time on things that actually make an improvement? Instead of treating every driver as a mark.
Actually was her watch. Got clocked at 4:56pm. A huge four minutes before the school zone changed back from 40 to 60. She got done for 15km/h over. Yes, her fault, but it’s STILL a cunt move from the cops.
Do they not have automated cameras giving fines in the UK or something?
Forms are available online, and a JP or lawyer etc needs to witness it.
Just google statutory declaration form and it’ll be on your state government’s website. You’ll need your get it signed by a justice of the peace as well.

I’ve had to fill out a couple for work.
If you're in Vic 

https://www.justice.vic.gov.au/statdecs

I'd assume each state would have their own version.
https://my.gov.au/en/about/help/digital-identity/digital-commonwealth-statutory-declaration
You can now do them online through mygov without the need to have them witnessed by a JP or anything, saves a lot of time
Download it from department of justice website
I lent my car to a friend. He stole it and ran off to Esperance. Took me three months to find him and by that time the car belonged to the insurance company.

He's not a friend anymore, and it hasn't stopped me lending my car to people, but I at least get a verbal agreement on when they'll give it back so I can get help from the police if they don't. I had to go to a better police station because the sergeant at the first one said it's not stolen. Second one said it's clearly fraud.
I'm sad I missed that one.
Wait do u have the link?
I had a rental car speeding fine from NSW follow me to the US, I just binned it. 

My wife was panic stricken when we went to get a rental at Sydney on our next visit. Nothing happened.
Report them as stolen.   /s
Someone opening potentially lines of credit in your name, acquiring assets in your name - that's pretty major fraud mate.
I’m an Aussie currently living in the US northeast. All road rules are mere ‘suggestions’ here. 

Highway with a 55mph limit? Everyone is doing 65-75 *minimum*. Residential speed limit at 30? Everybody is doing 35. (Doesn’t help that I saw 5 changes in speed limit within a 5min drive along a single road). Give way sign? Hell no! (In fact if you do anything other than a ‘gun it’ merge onto the highway then you’re fucked). And speed cameras are apparently unconstitutional in this state 🙄 and don’t get me started on the amount of people who now run red lights post-COVID and there’s zero enforcement of that either. 

Unless you’re being a right cunt, going 30 over in a school zone or above 90mph, right in front of a ‘Statie’, then it’s all fair game. Biggest thing I tell people when visiting Australia? Road rules are *rules*. Not *suggestions*.
Across the border in the USA, it's pretty standard for people to approach 10mph over fairly regular, so similar rule even if we use different systems when driving. In residential you'll maybe get flagged doing 10 over, but freeway? Not on the west coast anywhere in aware of. We too have a strong dislike of traffic cameras.
Brit here. They most definitely do not flow at this speed most motorways are full of road works or traffic jams.

The limit on the motorway is 70 mph or 112kph. Yes we get dickheads going faster but it's not normal.
I've lived in the UK. In the southern half of England they have *far* more speed cameras than we do, and driving all over the UK I never saw motorways flowing at those speeds. The newer UK freeways even do the average speed checks across long distances. The UK takes speeding very seriously.
Ridiculous. All you need to do to avoid fines is not break the law. Speed limits and road rules are laws. Don’t break the law, you don’t get fined. I understood that when I moved here and I’ve had 1 infringement in 18 years, which was definitely my fault and I paid it and took the points without complaint. 

I moved here from California, where it is actually dangerous to drive the speed limit on the freeway. I managed to understand I was in a different country and adjust to the conditions.
https://www.visitflorence.com/moving-around-florence/by-car.html


This was 2008 so there wasn't quite as much info online. Although annoying neither rental car agency or hotel mentioned it. Language barrier I guess.
when that happens i assume it could be a subtle corporate marketing strategy...
Live loving? Yeah I see you've properly assimilated
They do, a lawyer.
So sad and frustrating isn’t it, when we grow up and learn these things that could’ve made such a huge difference when we were young and dumb 🥲
The speed limits on UK roads operate under a principle called the National Speed Limit.

Driving in the UK you might have seen a sign that looks like that

[https://images.prismic.io/passmefast/65b915a4615e73009ec41360\_national-speed-limit-sign-uk-2.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&w=1920](https://images.prismic.io/passmefast/65b915a4615e73009ec41360_national-speed-limit-sign-uk-2.jpg?auto=format%2Ccompress&fit=max&w=1920)

The national speed limit varies depending on the type of road you are on and the vehicle you're driving

So on a motorway the national speed limit is 70 for car but if that was towing a trailer it speed limit is 60

[https://www.avis.co.uk/drive-avis/driving-guides/what-is-the-national-speed-limit](https://www.avis.co.uk/drive-avis/driving-guides/what-is-the-national-speed-limit)

You may not see the National Speed Limit sign on Motorways, instead you will likely see a blue rectangular sign denoting this road is a Motorway

[https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:UK\_motorway\_symbol.svg](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:UK_motorway_symbol.svg)

That sign denotes that this is a motorway and thus the national speed limit applies
Which road sorry?
Yes, but UK police don't hide anywhere near as much as I found Aus police doing so.  Static cameras are very obvious.  It's also pretty normal to do 10-20mph over on the motorway.

I copped several fines in my first year in Aus.
You can have it witnessed by the myGov app

Or any nurse, or doctor, or most public servants, or posties, or emergency services, or librarians

There are a lot of people that can witness a stat Dec
Anyone who has been in the public service (state or federal) for more than 3 years can sign a stat dec.

Another good one is a pharmacist. 

Heaps more… read the form… or this website that you can print the form off of:

https://www.ag.gov.au/legal-system/statutory-declarations
Can they be used in any situation that an agreement is made ?
Also to add, ensure it's relevant to the state, and not commonwealth stat dec.
Where I live in Nth East Vic, they have JPs at the police station during certain hours, so people can get their stat decs signed.  I think I picked the stat dec up from the local magistrates court. Just call and enquire.  Also remember NOT to sign it until you are with the JP
nothing better than an indignant seppo rageposting about the consequences of their actions.
“Why people dislike American tourists” - Exhibit A
You would think so but when I asked the cop could barely suppress a laugh. I think the cops in Surry Hills are pretty exhausted.
Dude in Oregon just got fined for doing 122mph in a 55mph zone and didn’t even lose his licence. This country is weird
I grew up in the NE US, and I had to spend two months in Australia for some training. Driving around  Australia made me anxious as all hell haha
UK had an mp who when confronted about speed related crashes said zero deaths is not an acceptable target because you need some level of speed to keep things efficient lol so some level of death should be accepted
Brit here and I disagree. Yeah the limit is 70, that doesn't always mean a lot.

It's certainly normal to go 90 on the M3 through Hampshire, or it was a bit under three years ago when I left. Most people would be going over 80, significant numbers over 90 and the Police did not GAF. And people seem to do whatever speed they feel like in places like the M6 toll and further north.

(Edit - Maybe things are slowing down in the UK but IMHO it's always been \*lot\* more laissez-faire on the roads there when it comes to speeding than here in Aus. I know it's changing with the introduction of more cameras everywhere and smart motorways, but it still amazes me how law abiding most people are here compared to "back home")
Depends where you are, 85mph on the M5 southern way will put you in the slow lane
Did it go down? Admittedly I wasn't driving as I was a youngster when I was growing up there, but I thought it used to be 80mph.
I’m British, and drove there for 25 years. Certainly more speed cameras on a lot of motorways now,  it in general respect for the limit was zero.

132km/h is 80mph, in my experience 80-85 is a *very* common speed for motorways to flow at, once you get away from London a bit Yeah, average speed checks are getting more common. Maybe things are changing.

The UK authorities take speeding quite seriously. The UK public don’t so much.
The image they showed had barely any notification in it about the start of the zone. 


This makes me feel better about using a tour company in Italy!
Hahaha you're right. I'm leaving it. 

Autocarrot is my worst enema
Thank you! We were confused because in Australia there are lots of speed limit signs.
Goyder St ACT. [Link](https://www.data.act.gov.au/widgets/i6cy-cqgf?mobile_redirect=true)
I get robbed *every* time I come home to visit family in Oz. I purposefully pick the slowest, most awful handling vehicle I can find too. Might have to buy a model A and store it at my cousins just to not get dinged. People in Australia fail to appreciate what a joy it is to not worry about being robbed every time you drive a car.
Had no idea could do this with the app! Brilliant!
Exactly why I had a stamp made up with my name and nursing registration number on it. Always available to sign a stat dec
Police can witness these too.
Teachers too I believe.
TIL that I'm qualified to witness a stat dec i guess
Chartered engineers
Bank manager also
I've always got mine done at the pharmacy 
Don't you need an Australian passport to sign stat decs in the myGov app? That's what the app told me when I tried.
You can also pop into your local court (if you have one that's within reach). The Clerk of the Court is often able to sign stat decs.
If I’m not mistaken, pharmacists can too.
DVA has offices that you can visit that are not busy at all if you need a stat dec signed by a public servant.
Our local shopping centre at Bathurst has a free JP booth. Maybe in other places too?
It's basically a legal declaration that you are telling the truth, in circumstances where other evidence isn't available. You wouldn't use it to replace something like a contract, where you'd want to specify terms and conditions. The friend in this case would basically be saying, yes it's true that I am borrowing the car and will be responsible for it.
Bad luck, Champ, not American . 

But I’m sure you would have done the same if you got caught in the US, so off you jog, sport.
Oregon is weird by itself, but yes.
lmao try drving in third world countries like the Philippines or India. theres no concept of right of way or rules
I mean, in a brutally honest way, if you want to have cars on the roads at all you’re gonna have to expect road deaths. It’s pretty inevitable, and it’s the price we pay.
We can do our best to minimise them of course.
Nah, it's always been 70. It's just also always been ignored.
The fixed cameras on motorways are everywhere, but they're very lenient.

Even though the speed limit is 70mph (112km/h) I *know* you can go through them at 75-77mph (120-123km/h) without them going off, and based on the fact (outside of London) it wouldn't be appropriate to be doing less than 80mph (132km/h) in the "fast lane", I'm guessing the tolerance is higher than my personal limit.
I'm stealing that
You're not being robbed you're just a really innatentive driver. Please pay more attention on the road here we have enough people dying as is.
I'm kinda suprised to hear how bad people are at keeping to posted limits. 


I recall US and UK tourists have alot of trouble adjusting to metric, could that he the issue? Or is it just a difference in culture.
Those of us who had to drive far often in the uk (like 30+ minutes cause that’s far there) usually drive like our hair is on fire.

There’s also the fabled 10% buffer rule that may or may not be an actual law, so if you’re pinged under 10% over they don’t fine you, I’ve experienced that not being the case here have had a fine for doing 53 or 54 in in a 50.

We just think we know better than the signs, which we absolutely do not, and also see Aussie roads as easy mode since that’s so enormous, there’s rarely any give and take or negotiation of traffic coming the opposite direction here - maybe school time while you’re at a ten attention wise anyway because parents dropping or collecting are now paying attention to their little darlings.

That being said ops friend is a dead set and would have lost his entire license with that behaviour in the uk, you certainly don’t do that in a mates car no way. Though if you’re following the rules in England it’s harder to just borrow a mates car, as if you’re not named on their insurance it’s illegal to drive it unless you personally have a type of insurance policy that covers you to drive any old car, which is costly unless your no claims bonus is high.
If you have any speeding fines via cameras, and you got fined in both directions, you can ask for the second to be removed due to you not being aware THAT YOUR SPEEDO IS NOT reflecting true speed rates, but also, fines are in place as a deterrent and you can’t change your behaviour until you receive the initial fine. My nephew is a lawyer and he argued this in court and got the fines dropped.
List of approved witnesses used to be on the back of the form, way back when we used to kill trees for all the reasons....

Now it's even easier.....

https://www.ag.gov.au/legal-system/statutory-declarations/about-commonwealth-statutory-declarations/who-can-witness-commonwealth-statutory-declaration#:~:text=A%20person%20can%20be%20considered%20an%20approved%20witness%20if%20they,High%20Court%20of%20Australia.
It’s a fairly new update.
Lots of police stations wont though
It says who can sign one on the back of the form.
I thought JPs needed to be upstanding members of society. That'll show me and my naivete.
Haha yeah.  

I meant a friend or relative who is a public servant
So you could for example use a stat-dec if purchasing or selling something to confirm item is  as described ? For a second hand car or a puppy ?
As a matter of fact a fine on a rental car followed me from the US internationally and I paid it, because I am not a flog.
>we have enough people dying as is.”    

See THAT is the rub. All this heavy enforcement does NOT make it safer. I moved countries and they canned the photo radar after I moved and there was literally zero chance in the fatality rate. Weather made a much bigger difference than enforcement. I can also cite the NT in Australia. Where they removed the “no limit” and imposed a max of 130km/h. And the road deaths jumped by 10%. So when the government changed hands they put the no limit back, and oh look the fatality rate went back down. Naturally the opposition planned to put it back. Despite the demonstration that it is a bad idea that kills people. So many of the arguments for strict enforcement are nothing more than an [appeal to authority](https://yourlogicalfallacyis.com/appeal-to-authority). I prefer a more nuanced view. [Link](https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=2BKdbxX1pDw) I also prefer watch where the hell I’m going rather than the speedo. Given that I’ve only crashed twice in the last twenty five years (both below the speed limit. One my fault, one not.) I feel my policy of watch the road, not the speedo, is entirely valid. YMMV. 

Edit: being ticketed going 115 on the Hume *is* being robbed. It’s nothing more than banditry with a badge.
Yeah, I came here from the US nearly 20 years ago. I was told how serious the speed limits are and road rules I’m general, and I’ve only had one infraction (went too late on a yellow light and got done by the red light camera). Aside from that my record is spotless, because I adjusted to the expectations of the culture. It’s not that hard if you try.
Nah, they just speed a lot. Some of my US friends say if you're doing the speed limit on the highway, you're a hazard to everyone else who's doing more like 10 or 20 miles over. 

No excuse for it when both the speed signs and your speedo are in the same measurement. Some wiggle room maybe when you are in Europe for instance, and some countries use one, and the next uses the other.
I grew up in Australia and now live near Toronto, Canada. Speed is in metric and the speed limit on the main highway (401) is 100. You are perfectly safe driving past a highway patrol speed trap at 120. There is a toll road (407) as well that I drove last week. Same speed limit. Most traffic does ~130kmh.
The UK is very relaxed about speeding, at least when they get the chance, so I guess that's culture. It is a shock that the speed limits are actually the speed limits. It's not just the UK, I think most Australian states are very clear about the actual speed limit and most other jurisdictions have more tolerance. Also, our fines are higher. I once got a 10 Euro speeding fine in Germany.
Australia is a bit of a nanny state on speed. Highways slower than most of the developed world, yet our road tolls are similar / worse in most cases. I don’t get it
Humans get used to making a personal assessment of how fast they should be going based on the conditions. That speed value is almost always higher than the posted limit. This is because the limit is for the worst conditions raining at night. Snowing etc. The limits on the highways also haven't changed for fifty years.Yet cars have got vastly better. Rather than allow humans on average to come to similar conclusions Australia demands they do as they are told. With heavy fines for not obeying.
Most cops stick to roughly 10% rule due to the cost associated with court ECT. If they had to go to court Everytime someone got done for 1km over then the courts would be packed and the cops wouldn't have time to police. So under 10% is normally a warning. Cameras on the other hand are run by the government and are brutal and harder to contest. So their allowance is much lower.
Why an architect? Seems like the rest are representatives of government/public systems. Architect seems an odd outlier?
Strange list:

A chiropractor but not an osteopath?  

A Member of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy?
Hmmmm. Someone else might want to jump in here. A sale is always a contract, and depending on the platform for the sale there are already contractual terms and conditions in place. Plus other evidence would often be available.
You’re a f*cking saint, champ !!
I won't argue with facts, but you're not being robbed you're choosing to speed.
No kidding. I came from Canada. One of my Australian colleagues (client) who'd recently moved back to Aus from Canada warned me in advance about speed limits, cameras, etc.

I'm from NB where doing 10 over won't even get a cop to bat an eye. 15 over you'll cop a warning unless you're a dick. 20 over and you're just getting a ticket. That's assuming you even come across a cop.

I did an indicated buck forty (140kph - probably closer to 130kph) all the way from Freddy to Halifax. It wasn't until I crossed into Nova Scotia that I started seeing officers.

Edut: when I moved here that changed. I don't speed anymore. Never copped a ticket. Why? I respect the cultural norms here, which is "don't be a dickhead!"
Thank you!
I noticed this when visiting Europe for the first time. Driving on the highway in Switzerland everyone was doing at least 20km/h over and my Uber driver was doing at least 40km/h over, and in the wet too. Scared the crap out of me haha.
The limits are constantly changing too for who knows what reason. The new tunnels in Sydney are full of cameras and the limits are all over the place from 60-90
No, noooo speed limits are not set to "worst conditions" are you insane? 


That or you're just trolling. On a reread, I think this is a more likely scenario.
Because they have a national body that manages registrations. Engineers cannot because it is state based. Some weird history behind it all
Far from a saint, I make mistakes, but when I do, I take the consequences. I don’t shirk responsibility. 

But that seems to be difficult to fathom for you, champ.
https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=8eiKMgE7U_0
Yep. The UK has the best system, few different categories but all limits consistent across the whole country
No, when I was first learning about driving that was a common line of reasoning for why speed limits were set to what they were.

I mean it's wrong, and there are many roads where the limit is just the default limit. based on the location of the road and what type of road it is on the map. While having nothing to do with actual road conditions.

Also used to drive down one road that went from 100 to 110 with no actual difference in road conditions.
Engineers are on the list linked to.
That makes sense, I'm an electrician, which as a licenced trade requiring extensive identification checks, thought might make the list. 
Now I can see why it wouldn't, being state based not National. 

Thanks for the answer!
As an Architect we don’t have national registrations, just local regulation boards. There are some states that accept mutual recognition, but you still need to register in each state you want to work. It’s a really backward system. I’m surprised architects can witness stat declarations, but I think it may be relatively new.
Oooh, you’re breaking my heart with your heartfelt appeal to my morality. 🤡
