I am curious to hear about the experiences of people dealing with cyberstalking/cyberbullying, the avenues they used to escape the harrasment and get justice as well as the challenges they faced in doing so. 

Basically, I want to learn more about the current ways aussies who are victims of cyberstalking / cyberbullying can get justice or recognition, and the challenges / success that people have. Personally, I feel like not enough is being done to help Australians dealing with this, but I am more than happy to be prooved wrong! I have friends who are dealing with it now and I want to do something help. Anything like peoples experiences with the eSafetyCommission and other gov bodies like Legal Aid / the state police when it came to reporting cyberharrasment / stalking etc. Good and bad experiences
I worked in the department that oversees the eSafety Commission. eSafety has a lot of power to deal with cyber safety issues. They tend to focus on getting intimidate images that have been posted without consent removed but can also take action against cyber bullying and cyber stalking. They also cooperate with state, federal and international police forces.

Report the abuse and take it from there - [https://www.esafety.gov.au/report/forms](https://www.esafety.gov.au/report/forms)
I’m not saying it doesn’t exist but it’s hard to imagine what’s being stalked can’t be secured? Are you referring to social media? Are the victims some type of public figure who need to be visible online?

Otherwise it’s either only something I’ve heard of happening to young adults and younger, or public figures.  No insights I can provide.

Or are you referring more to doxing and posting about someone else rather than to them?

*edit* I guess I'll never know what was meant then. Good discussion had
The e safety commissioner is unelected. What see think and say and do is subjective.

Slippery slope to what Belgium and Germany did in the European block.

To filter in all the other things they wanted with impunity.

Anything limiting free speech and what the public can or cannot see is not a good thing.
