
Holy cow - this is trading whilst insolvent - there's absolutely no excuse for Executives or Directors to not be tracking weekly or even daily the situation as to whether the Rex Jet was a going concern. 

Assuming the article is correct then there's a group of Directors that should be getting fuck-off big fines/banned from sitting on Boards from ASIC.
yea funny how management never have this problem, huh? they knew well in advance to get theirs and then to find another gig... previous job, my co-workers found out through the community newspaper their place was closing down... fuck corporations and their 'code of silence' culture...
Such a shame that the employees have to wait months for their pay and redundancy money.Hope they can make ends meet.After reading this piece it’s beginning to sound like REX was probably operating while insolvent 
Why do I get the feeling it's going to be tax payers paying these wages?  Rex leases the 737s so there is no equity there.  They most likely own the 57 Saab 340s but they are tied to their regional service, a service the government is going to be under pressure to keep afloat, so who pays the employees, most likely us.
My hearts go out to the workers. Genuinely fucked.
I knew the two packets of rice crisps they gave me on Rex was too good to be true
There are a lot of Rex aircraft still flying right at this moment... who's paying for that?
Ok. Fair enough.

However, Jail the entire board and senior management for letting this happen.
Companies should be legally required to have enough money set aside specifically to pay all wages at all times. With this money being unable to be used for other debts/bills. 

 And failure to have enough on pay day should mean that those who made the decision to not do so are on the hook for payment of those wages from their own funds, plus extra fines (paid to employees) for each week they delay paying.  Also have it part of audit requirements so if the funds are ever found to be insufficient, those responsible are fined increasing amounts weekly until it’s rectified. 
This organisation owes a company I cannot name for legal reasons over $70k. A small business which will have to front those costs and will probably never see that debt paid without a court battle. Let alone the hundreds of families fearing homelessness and the employees left in the dark while managers get the heads up to jump ship. Those directors should be ashamed of themselves.
This is tragic. Working and then stood down with no pay or redundancy. It bloody hurts seeing what’s happening in Australia.
Maybe limited liability can be limited to say, average house price
This was obviously to blind Freddy, I got downvoted heavily when I made some comments about Rex and them doing the Mel-Syd route a few years ago.
Absolutely tragic destruction of a company over just a few short years.

Current CEO has been in the job just a couple of months - that is a hospital pass of epic proportions.
Rex was key for flying regional, had the pleasure to fly them during work.

Crazy that chasing the budget capital city routes killed their entire business.
Garnish executives assets until all workers are paid what they're owed
Bet the investors/shareholders/board of directors have enough cash from the years of bonuses to cover redundancies. But no, that would never happen. It’s always the workers who are out of pocket
My daughter found out from Jetstar staff.
Qantas needs to answer for those claims made by  the wagga wagga member today,if true that's fucked.


Apparantly  qantas was coming in,stealing all their aircraft mechanics and shit with like 25-30k bonuses..keeping on roll for a year,then putting them in line for "outsourcing" or redundancy  a year later


Effectively making it Prohibitively expensive for rex to service it's fleet



There is  under cutting ur opponent which is a part of capitlism,then theres just being a cunt in the hope they fail
The government ploughed a fortune of taxpayer $$$ into Rex. I wanna know what luxurious suburbs do all the execs live in??
But they were able to renogiate the CEO’s contract just 6 days earlier to increase his severance pay from 5 weeks to 12 months…
This should be CRIMINAL and the Directors should be held personally criminally liable...  I understand that's not how Corporations work... and no one would ever sit on Boards if that were the case...  but it's just not right...   it seems they used employee entitlements as cash to run the business.   This money should be held in trust and protected...  of course NO government of ANY stripe would ever do that...  political suicide...
The government should just buy them at this point, Its such a critical service for regional australia.
Fcking sad
How does this affect their subsidiaries, like NJE?
Can I buy a plane?
Wut
Can someone photoshop the logo to say Rekt
Good thing we have a Labor government to stop this entitlement theft. Oh wait....
Flying is expensive. People expect flights to be cheap. This is why I actually don’t hesitate to help or stand up for drivers, pilots or the companies that provide vehicles or manage facilities associated with vehicular transportation.

It’s a bit like a slave job. As it takes your concentration so completely, you have to be entirely sober & straight, but that’s difficult as the job is actually stressful. The other thing is quarantine. Where transportation is involved, you have to handle quarantine matters and security matters. I note that this is very basic for many small aircraft and flight businesses. To improve it you need facilities. But most landing strips and runways are in floodzones and will be completely underwater in very short time, with some (consistently underestimated) rises of 2 meters likely to make it difficult to finance new facilities, knowing that they are temporary. Temporary dwellings would be great, but they can make airlines look shabby, and give them a dangerous appearance, as if they are ‘fly by night’ businesses, or criminal enterprises run by shady gangsters, especially if they are secondhand and rundown and unrenovated, no matter how functional. 

However, there’s all sorts of opportunities for problems outside of the ‘put people in plane, fly, land, take people out of plane’ or the place this occurs, and whatever parking or public transportation there is that makes it trivial to fly. By the sounds of it, this company had issues there. Trafficking or transporting drugs like alcohol or live animals are a problem, carrying seeds or fruit or soils might be issues. Carrying illegal seafood. Then there’s financing planes and funding maintenance. 

There’s the problem of pollution from the exhaust and the fuel costs, but also fuel origin (think blood diamonds, but with animals and plants being exploited, rather than humans - recall refineries and of course, sources of hydrocarbons like oil sands and the infrastructure to make and maintain undersea and on land oil pumps) and additives. 

Some fuels still use lead, though you would hope these aircraft are larger than that, and the exhausts are - less than toxic. 

There’s the problem that aircraft are expensive to make and slow to incorporate improvements in cheap models, and also, recycling is not so solid, and is expensive. So if you realise your fleet is trash (even though it’s new or newish) there’s this issue that recycling the metal is expensive and the energy for smelting aluminium is often from fossil fuels as well. The vented gases aren’t filtered so properly, and the filters aren’t recycled in closed loop ways often enough. 

It’s one of these difficult industries, particularly as people’s lives are in your hands.

It’s probably a good idea to collaborate to maintain flight options for regional areas.

Here’s a point. I am very annoyed when I read about e-bikes and escooters being banned everywhere because of fire risk. And, I note, new ebikes have rediculous range. Eg. 350 KILOMETERS!

So the whole approach of ‘put people in plane with luggage, fly, disembark them at airstrip, leave them be’ is a bit ruthless when it’s not including eg. ‘let passengers carry approved or even non-approved ebikes & escooters’.

You see, I should be able to get a small plane to a tiny airstrip somewhere out in the country, the pilot drops me and my luggage and bike off, and I then do the rest by ebike, using high speed bike paths.

With satellite to mobile phones, this is simple and safe. This means unattended airstrips are fine, as you don’t actually need a visitor to pickup the passengers. They can ride. 

This whole paradigm is beyond what people might call ‘carbrains’. The involvement of a PEV you can lift with one hand. 

However, if you want to enable people to get places rapidly without disruption to the existing schedule of people already working, you need to enable them to travel without needing to be met by people in vehicles. 

This vastly increases the mobility of people. This helps you bring in specialists. As farms are automated and administrative complexes proliferate and technology reliability and the pace of change results in less certainty, and environmental requirements and regulations demand significant increases in environmental studies and surveys and monitoring, and all this is far beyond the capability of a property leaseholder, owner or operator to handle, you need ways to lower the cost, speed and complexity of travel from eg. an apartment in a capital city to a cattle station or a rural broadacre or other farm including aquaculture or other, or to national park, state forest, conservation park, zoo, rehabilitation park, indigenous community, or to places subject to fire or flooding.
I hope Rex goes out of business. Fucking terrible airline
I used to work in insolvency. There are only a handful of individuals who have ever been convicted of trading insolvent. Specifically in the building industry which basically runs on insolvency, ASIC has failed to charge a single individual.

These guys will get off scott free.
that's what *should* happen. What *will* happen is that 350 newly unemployed people aren't going to be paid for work they've already done, and won't receive any sort of severance. The execs will have already been paid, because they will make sure that happens *before* this news broke. ASIC will continue to be overworked, under-resourced and under-funded. Execs with full wallets will waddle off to fuck something else up in the corporate world, while 350 people need to start frantically applying for the same 20 jobs in their industry.
Are you here all week? Should we try the veal?
[deleted]
> Directors that should be getting fuck-off big fines/banned from sitting on Boards from ASIC.

best I can do is a wet lettuce leaf across the wrist
My partner didn't know anything about this as she was too busy to follow the news. The day before they went into voluntary administration, she called to book a flight for herself and our two kids. She had to phone them to use a combo of credit and cash (their online booking system is ancient and can't take credit vouchers). They wouldn't let her pay some of the fare with our points because the company had instructed staff not to let customers use any points. This means they knew what was about to happen. 

Nek minit, flight was cancelled. They actually took her money, knowing full fucking well that they were selling a flight that was never going to depart. Seems to be a theme here in Australia.

I realise Virgin are taking on some of these passengers, but getting where they need to be on the day they need to be there remains to be seen.

Fucking director cunts need to be held accountable. They never are though.
No way any directors will be going to jail. Regardless of laws broken.
I wonder how many executive level got their own pay? I bet all of them.
Trading while insolvent means you're trending when you know you can't meet your immediate obligations. One would argue wages aren't due until they're due next week? I'm not an insolvency lawyer, but I think that's the case? 
lol you make it sound like murder, no one is getting fines
In travel the trick is for people to watch their super. So many travel companies that went bust used the employee super to keep going that bit longer.
At the going rate for redundancy pay it’s about a year
Also takes ages for Centrelink to process unemployment payments
Fair Entitlements Guarantee is where it comes from then the government goes after the liable people to recoup it. So yes tax payers do temporarily pay it out, but some gets cleared back. Better than leaving it to employees to try and individually claw it back.
Privatise the profits for a few, socialise the debts for all, thats the modern capitalism manifesto!
Privatise the profits, socialise the losses.
How did Bonza work out?
Nationalise REX as a government backed carrier.
We will pay them one way or another.  I'd rather see workers get paid then shafted.

But then the Government should go after the directors
Oh no, my taxes will go towards the greater benefit of others in society.

What ever will I do??
I mean Rex is just trying to copy the Qantas business  model
most were fucked over by Virgin before that too, possibly even a few from the Ansett era.
Probably the turning point of the business right there.
Sweet or savoury snack. I always went the cookie.
You were only meant to take one. This is your fault and I don't know how you can sleep at night.
You'll find its broken into two different companies. The interstate business, which is now in administration, and the intrastate business, which is still flying. Planned this way so that if the new venture failed, it wouldnt take out the old one.
PAG through in capital to keep REX flying regional routes
> Companies should be legally required to have enough money set aside specifically to pay all wages at all times. With this money being unable to be used for other debts/bills. 

They are.
My friend. You have just described the prohibition on trading while insolvent.
They are, and agreed it should be enforced better, but these things can quickly run away from you. 

Accounting for cashflow management is complex and relies on forecasting of a lot of variables. All businesses operate on accounts, and if said forecasting of revenue and future costs doesn’t match up, you could go from being ‘okay we have funds to pay the next 6 months of trading’ to ‘shit, we’re waiting on payment for an account so we can make payroll’ virtually overnight.

That said, there’s no excuse for anything but conservative and sensible forecasting and monitoring. Being reckless should mean the book is thrown at directors (no suggestion there’s been any negligence on the part of the Rex board, BTW)
Unfortunately they can't take anything to court now that the company is in administration - everything now is governed by the Administrator and ASIC laws on how Administrations are run. 

Long story short - the company owed $70k might get back 25-45c on the dollar - but that will take a shit-tonne of time. They'd be wise to go hard cutting costs as much as possible and having open dialogue with customers and suppliers to see what they can do to get them through this period. 

I'd also suggest they need to start talking to their State and Federal Member to see what assistance programs are out there and also to the ATO - there's a good chance the ATO will work constructively with them on future PAYG/SGC payments (possibly extending deadlines without penalties as long as they're being transparent
The current CEO was the former COO, and the former CEO is the current Chair.  So it's not like they were in the dark about what was going on.
It hasn't killed the entire business, exactly.  The regional arm is a different entity and is still flying.  You you can continue to have the pleasure of flying them regional for work.

Edit - more info:  The entity in administration is "Rex Airlines."

The entity that runs the regional services is "Regional Express Airlines" and is still operating.  

They're the same logo and it's a linked company for sure, but operated at arms-length to guard against the exact scenario of the capital city business affecting the regional one.
I'm sure that there are some key QANTAS exec with a sly, satisfied smurk on their faces.
But that would be fair
lol
It’s a nonsense claim. Rex’s Chairman is a former National party MP so it’s the Coalition looking out for their own. 

> Apparantly qantas was coming in,stealing all their aircraft mechanics and shit with like 25-30k bonuses..keeping on roll for a year,then putting them in line for "outsourcing" or redundancy a year later

Qantas hasn’t made a single engineer compulsory redundant for years. You don’t “steal” employees, they freely chose to leave one company to another for reasons and yes Qantas is considered a much better employer than Rex
So, if you have an ebike, you can actually ride from home to GA airport, washdown bike and check gear and shower, then board plane, fly, then land, disembark, then ride, sleeping or stopping as needed, to the destination. Then, charge the vehicle, or use roll-up panels, and then travel back to the unattended airstrip, call in a plane, get pickup, fly, land, then decontaminate any seeds or dust or mud or organics, do basic vehicle maintenance and handle bags and luggage, in backpacks or panniers for cleanliness, then go back to the apartment, and handle any final cleanup or maintenance.

This type of approach is how you can get someone in a city to a place in the outback rapidly without placing burdens on other who work there.  

This is important as for conservation, you need hands and eyes on ground, taking samples. You need evidence of species decline or recovery. You need a human to in-person validate things.

And for equipment maintenance and reliability, it’s difficult and expensive to send a professional to a site with full equipment for onsite repair of machinery or of computing or communications equipment. Prior to them attending, with their heavy repair truck, you can fly in a trainee or an apprentice or student, or less experienced employee, to represent the responsible company. That can be a ‘rapid deploy’ of a person who can give full and undivided attention to the problem at hand, without distraction of other duties or responsibilities on the property or land, or to do with the plants or animals, or the produce or effort leading to outcome. This can be the fast response to help coordinate the heavier, more expensive vehicles, that might be required for a repair or service if other things fail. 

That’s the thing. A farm or a property in rural or regional areas has often, far more equipment and relies on manufactured goods far more significantly than people in cities realise.

What the problem is that you become so reliant on the equipment, that you can’t take chances if it breaks or if there’s a problem that interrupts time-critical activity. 

There are complexities like use-by and best-before dates. And ships that depart from docks on schedules that are difficult and expensive to change. In fact, some shipping of export goods is so expensive if delayed, that missing a ship is a disaster, especially if commodities prices are varying. 

So there’s this need to be able to get people to places fast, cheap, easy and to be able to get many people around. You don’t get that when they all have heavy 4wds, and are trying to carry full toolsets. You can’t afford to provide new staff or trainees with this type of configuration if you’re a company trying to warrant and maintain equipment that is scattered across an entire country, where you’re trying to reduce the costs of that for farmers so as to reduce their debt burden or lending servicing costs, the interest payments. And most work doesn’t need a full workshop or laboratory to be sent to a property for many of the problems that interrupt functional use or that interfere with reliability. 

So.. I wonder if this administration is going to help facilitate this situation where you need to help people in remote farming regions where the farms steadily become more complex to improve the quality, safety and reliability of the produce, especially as they might further roboticise or automate more significantly?

I wonder if farmers or the government will be able to increase the number of people on farms helping with environmental problems and of course, species conservation and protection, if they can more affordably send specific individuals or pairs of people with skills to regions where more attention is needed to gather scientific data that can inform conservation efforts?

I wonder if this helps with other things like riparian corridors or nature corridors to be expanded and well understood so that as little disruption occurs to those who work to produce or provide from the land?
Didn't the FAI dude do time for that failing? I can't think of his name, Sydney Jewish guy, connected to James Packer
How many 70-40’s have you lodged where ASIC has actually taken action? I know the exact number for me, exactly 0. Even a clear phoenix requires 3 strikes, it’s a complete joke, there is no punishment for corporate mismanagement in Australia
They will get paid through the Fair Entitlement Guarantee Scheme and tax payers will foot the bill.

Irononically the scheme originated as a result of John Howard's BIL's company going under and not having the cash to pay staff.
Stupid question but do the 350 staff just never get made whole then? Or will they eventually recoup the costs once the whole thing plays out?
Skip the veal and go straight for the chicken schnitzel...
They've also been having huge board drama and aren't losing money nearly as rapidly in the past... I really do wonder if the board drama caused a withdrawal of investors or something.
Which begs the question - what liabilities had they signed up to based on these expansion plans? What guarantees or contracts did they have to sign with PER to get slots? Perth Airport Corporation are not known as the most reasonable, rational GOC in Australia...
What's wild is that Those new routes were in development more than a year ago. I was distantly an acquaintance of a guy who was hired and then placed in their Perth group. It takes that long to make it work, to train up new people and get them to work.
My missus booked a flight weeks ago, and managed to book a virgin equivalent - same day & nearly the same time. She paid $206 to Rex, and Virgin charged Rex $400.
> They actually took her money, knowing full fucking well that they were selling a flight that was never going to depart. Seems to be a theme here in Australia.

DJ once offered me a gift card in return because they can't refund online purchases made with PayPal. I said that I would rather my money back since a gift card is equal to a piece of toilet paper should DJ go belly up.
Daddy...  is everything going to be alright...  some kids at school said you might be going to jail...."

Son, I'm a Corporate Director in Australia..... we don't **GO** to jail..... we get new positions elsewhere in new cities and companies, like nothing ever happened.

But Daddy... what about the people at your work that don't have jobs any more... will they be getting positions elsewhere to....?  

Son... I told you last time when we used to live in Brisbane..... remember that.. before Dadddy had to move jobs....   I said...  Son...  don't think about those people..  I don't... and you shouldn't either...     you'll never have to see them or worry about them... as long as I'm a (*strikes pose... stares off to horizon*) Corporate Director.
Surely you "owe" wages as soon as that day/shift/hour is complete, no? It's an immediate obligation I would have thought.
From ASIC: A company is insolvent if it is unable to pay its debts when they fall due. Before you incur a new debt you must consider whether you have reasonable grounds to suspect the company is insolvent or will become insolvent as a result of incurring the debt.
I'm not an insolvency lawyer either but my laymans understanding is that as a Director you need to ensure the business can meet - in full - its current debts, AND be able to do so before incurring additional debt. The moment they couldn't make payroll and SGC contributions, and they kept trading - then it would appear they've broken the law. 

I just re-read the ABC article and they're quite explicit that "it will be some months before they can meet payroll and redundancy" - not, we can't meet payroll and redundancy... 

The move by the Directors to bring in EY who then put it almost immediately into administration is probably going to be enough to keep their old white arses out of jail...
You accrue labor costs every hour, with an industry like aviation, you probably accrue a shitloads more of other costs like fuel etc every hour as each of your planes is landing and taking off. They most definitely would know if this weeks bookings are going to provide a cash flow buffer to pay next week's and if they got to this point it shows they where probably hoping for a miracle to pay the next round of bills.
If you know you have no accounts receivables coming in between now and payroll and have insufficient funds to meet payroll, you are insolvent. 

You are can also be insolvent if your current liabilities exceeds your current assets on your balance sheet
You are right there. I had a look at the financials. Definitely insolvent. Their current assets were greater than their current liabilities for a while, meaning they cannot pay their debts. I wonder how that got through an audit.
No, you also need to consider expected debts.
In any industry really. If super is missed, late regularly or starts getting paid at apparently random intervals, get out. And lodge that ato unpaid super claim on the first day you're able
It seems to be harder to get centrelink now too. More hoops to jump through with paperwork, showing ur payslips and exit letters from past employees. I haven't been able to even submit my claim yet because my ex employer havent sent me my exit letter.
I'm happy the tax payer will pay out wages for employees. This is what a civilised country should do.
Sounds like getting blood from a stone
They need to do clawbacks on the directors
Yep and they’ll jump up and down because the unemployed dare to want a few extra dollars to buy some food.

These execs are the real leaches of society
Feg and long delay before employees could claim. No idea how much emotional got from feg and how much super they missed out on
Qantas did at least pay out its staff when it illegally fired them. 
Sleep like a dragon protecting its treasure on top of my rice crisps
While that's true, apparently there's still a lot of concern about the finances of the regional arm.   But many of those flights get a lot of government subsidies which help ensure continued revenue.
If they didn't the Australian Government would tell PAG to fuck right off. They probably still might/should.
Then those laws should actually be enforced, because they clearly are not.
And yet, the rex employees are still in this situation. What are the consequences for those responsible. Are they personally responsible for paying the wages? Will they be fined for not?
Whilst that is true, the usual MO when a company gets in trouble is that the board gets rid of the CEO, and then the new CEO (usually an external hire) replaces the rest of the leadership.

It is possible that he has taken the role with full knowledge of what was about to happen, and his job is essentially to cop all of the heat that will now be coming from all directions - I have seen this happen on a couple of occasions, usually the person is paid well for the job too as they go in knowing that it's a sinking ship. 

In that case he won't be being expected to fix this, just to clean it up. Essentially an executive janitor.
The current chairman has only been there for a couple of months. I'm sure there's a reason the board got rid of the existing chair and largest shareholder.
I forgot to mention: You need new airplanes for this. Probably need to be able to jettison cargo.
Rodney Adler

From wikipedia:
>Rodney Stephen Adler (born 19 August 1959) is an Australian whose family founded the FAI Insurances group, of which he became chief executive in 1989, and which was at one stage Australia's third largest general insurer. Adler became a director of HIH Insurance after the acquisition of that company, and resigned in January 2001, two months before HIH collapsed. He was jailed in 2005 for his conduct related to the collapse of HIH, where Adler obtained A$2 million from HIH by false or misleading statements and being dishonest as a director.[

TLDR didnt do time for trading while insolvent. He fiddled with the books to the tune of $2m
Oh maybe, my information is admittedly dated to mid 2022 when I exited the industry. Could have changed, however this article from October 2023 seems to suggest it still stands as of ~9 months ago:

[https://amp.abc.net.au/article/102998460](https://amp.abc.net.au/article/102998460)
Rodney Adler
Rodney Adler

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rodney_Adler

or Ray Williams

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ray_Williams_(businessman)
It depends if any staff were contractors, which is likely to be at least some of them. The FEGS also doesn't give you super. I tried chasing my super through the ATO but gave up in the end. Just not worth the hassle.
National Textiles?
The 350 staff wait until they can apply to feg and wait at least 16 weeks for payment. They are unlikely to get everything back. They are unlikely to get super and feg is limited based on the amount that can be paid to employees
Chances are that they will get cents on the dollar at best, and nothing at worst.
Skip the schnitzel, bring the farm. We'll be here for a while.
This is likely. If investors pulled out the funding they were expecting to receive is no longer available. 
Airlines don't pay the airport for slots...
We put in an online request the same morning the news broke, as instructed, but we're still waiting. We tried calling the number, but they told us that because our flight isn't within 48hrs, we just have to wait and see. Which has kinda fucked because if they offer us a flight that doesn't suit our arrangements at the other end, the delay in rebooking takes the opportunity away from us to book with a different airline (flights are selling out elsewhere). If we don't hear back soon, we'll have to just wear it and book with a different airline.

Meanwhile the directors will be enjoying their riches and still allowed to be directors of other companies. It's theft.
What's DJ? Yeah good call. It's something we don't think about really, but we should.
Correct afaik. As soon as you work a single hour, you’re “owed” that wage.
The directors have placed REX in administration because they decided they can't pay wages of employees. Could be argued that they did everything they could to avoid trading while insolvent. A company plans to have enough money in the bank to pay wages when wages are calculated and ready to be transferred to the employees' bank accounts.
> to keep their old white arses out of jail...

Just a note that the main owner and former chair is Singaporean.  But still, rich enough to stay out of jail for sure.
> keep their old white arses out of jail...

The board of directors for Rex is actually less white than the rest of Australia, i.e. white people are under represented on this board.....
Oh yeah as someone who has been the employee in this situation more than once, I'm more than happy for tax to go to this. I can't imagine how many desperate people would turn to violence against those responsible if the safety net wasn't there.
This. Happy for my taxes to pay these folks out… so long as someone goes after the execs that let this happen to get the money back. Keep seeing the photo of that guy standing in front of his massive White House with his big green lawn…
I'm happy for this but how quickly does this scheme kick in for these employees?
Agreed. I would rather my tax dollars go to this than paying the pension for oldies sitting in two million dollar homes by themselves, or corporate handouts or sex workers taking the NDIS for a ride.
I don't agree.
It does eventually get clawed back, I know of an ex director that was paying down debt from his previous failed company. Then he phoenixed and that company went under with his wife as the director only for him to phoenix again, although she now has debt to pay and both are barred from being directors. It's fucked really
They do claw back from directors.
If clawbacks don't work, maybe claw hammers could do the trick!
From money the government gave them during covid
The bigger concern with the regionals is the fact that the Saab fleet is nearing its end of life, the aircraft are extremely old and will need to be replaced. Luckily, Rex went and wasted all of its money on the 737s so now they have no money left AND an ageing fleet.
According to [https://www.planespotters.net/airline/REX-Airlines](https://www.planespotters.net/airline/REX-Airlines) 24 of their 57 SAAB 340s are stored/parked. If you check the airframe details of the stored/parked ones, you'll see many have been stored for quite some time (more than a month).
Oh dont worry it will be enforced. The previous CEO will be fined 10k and asked politely not to do it again
I mean who do they punish, they insolvent company?
Directors can be held responsible for unpaid wages (and other debts) in *some circumstances*. They can also be fined and, among other things, prohibited from holding an office/directorship for a prescribed period.

There is no law that can, *in practice*, prevent businesses from going bust. Poor management will always be a feature of our economic regime. The costs associated with some kind of monitoring regime to track company solvency is simply not feasible or practical. At the risk of oversimplifying, making murder illegal doesn’t stop murders from happening.

It’s likely that the directors will face some (potentially steep) consequences, but there’s not really a way we can stop these things from happening other than to incentivise directors to not be dickheads… and unfortunately it’s more often a case of incompetence and misguided optimism than wilful non-compliance. Please note I said often, not always (or even most of the time).
Well this was an unexpected blast from the past! I worked at hih when it collapsed and it was a living hell. I forgot these arse clowns got off Scott free while people came to our offices and punched women in the face because they didn’t get their insurance cheques!
Yep, that's the dude. I couldn't remember whether it was TWI or having the hand in the till... I actually met the guy once and he gave off Trump-like creepy vibes
This. I've been in their position and I got just over two weeks pay for what was around 11 weeks of unpaid work and entitlements. And I was lucky to get that.
FEG will cover their salary + entitlements, just not unpaid super.
I had to go through this about 3 years ago. Took about 10 weeks if I remember correctly. However, that was during COVID when a lot of businesses were going into administration. 

I imagine something this big will be given some priority to close out quickly. The FEG website says 16 it can take up to weeks.
The entire NDIS is full of people taking it for a ride, dunno why you've highlighted SW's in particular. Especially as it's mostly the middle men doing the rorting
You would agree if it were your wages, I guarantee it
The same money that was given to all stood down employees in all affected industries.
It’s been on their minds for about 10 years, but there’s basically no alternative newer aircraft manufactured anywhere. Q300/400 or the ATRs are too big, would blow their margins, and can’t land on many of the airstrips Rex services. 

They partially addressed this by buying up Saab’s spares, and can resort to parting out existing parked aircraft, but obviously this will cannibalise eventually.

One day, the taxpayer might be footing the bill to extend a bunch of runways and retrofit regional airports with security to take the larger Dash 8s, then underwriting services which will be put to tender every few years, like they do with bus companies across the country (see also Rex’s QLD milk-run routes).
The Directors of that company.
They make the directors personally liable.
Their consequence will be that they can't be on the board of their mate's company's for a while, and will have to settle on a mate of a mates company instead.
Thanks for the explanation
One would hope that all employers are treated as first creditors, to all of their treasure chests. Even before any civil punishments are distributed.
maybe on the payment, but not on the principle.

The debt is owed by the investors in the business.  It should be payed by the business.  If it's now a thing that decency and dignity don't prevent this, then we will need to make businesses pay wages in advance into Government run funds, in advance.

It's not acceptable for a government to pay out false profits, then have workers have to pay to bail out other workers.
The Dornier 328 is in production and is a similar size to the Saab.
You forgot to make that as *personally liable* ..
Look, you won’t see me saying the penalties are too strict— they’re not, especially when you compare the punishments dished out for non-violent offences, specifically theft. 

But in practice these orders will be a blanket ban on holding a position. Yes, in the SMB space you see punters trying to skirt that through using their wife/partner as a director and acting as a shadow director. But for players at this level (that is, larger and/or listed companies that actually practice some form of corporate governance) that won’t fly. But then again maybe Optus will hire them.
Correct AFAIK.

1) taxes

2) wages

3) secured creditors take assets

4) all unsecured creditors get the scraps.
Without getting too in the weeds, yes, *employees* are generally treated as priority creditors. As to your last point, if the company is insolvent it’s unlikely the company is going to be subject to further penalties as there is presumably no money to pay them. Depending on the circumstances the directors may be *personally* liable, which by definition means those funds would come from the directors’ personal holdings, not the company’s. 

From another perspective, enforcement proceedings cost money. There is no utility in spending money to enforce a fine on someone (a company) who can’t pay it and will likely cease to exist soon. It’s a net loss for the agency, which already has sparse resources.
Ooh! The Fairchild JV? Thanks for pointing that out - I’d thought they’d finished, but apparently restarted. Could be a viable option in the future once the Saabs are life expired.
 or even a Dash 8-100
Thanks for that but with due respect you were the one who raised the possibility of punitive actions. My wish is that staff is looked after before fines. 

As for the money of directors. Let’s hope they actually look for the dollars
