Frequently, I see people suggest that Australia is the best country on Earth. Reasonable education, healthcare and social security etc. 

All things considered, it is pretty good here. However, this often obscures any genuine criticism of the way things are, especially for the younger generation, resulting in a lack of innovation or genuine improvement. 

Obviously, there are key issues that have not been effectively addressed. Namely housing, sociocultural factors, acquisition of meaningful work etc. So I'm interested to hear what factors may be driving people to leave Australia? For me, I've found the social environment challenging over the last few years. 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
In my 20s, and left Australia for now. For me, the cost of living in Sydney was (as a percentage of income) as high as mega cities like London, NY and LA but came with nowhere near the amount of stuff to do or career opportunities in my field. I’ll come back, but for now I am really glad that I left.
I'm French citizen, permanent resident here. The key things would be housing (not only affordability but also the quality) and the proximity to other places (everything is very far away but infrastructure is lacking).

Other than that it's pretty nice here!

Edit: maybe alcohol too?
We have little economic future outside of digging things out of the ground and rent seeking. No investment into technology, services, research etc.
I left Australia five years ago. I’d realised as a single person with a decent job and income living in Melbourne, I’d never be able to afford a place of my own in an area I loved. I rented in North Melbourne and loved it, but would have to move much, much further out if I ever wanted to buy. I wasn’t happy to compromise lifestyle. 

I’m currently writing this on a train to Latvia. I’ve been to 34 European countries in the past five years. I know it’s not forever, and Australia is a great place to settle. But it is isolated.
It sucks growing up in a country full of promise and hope just to see it being flushed down the toilet. Very sad.
Everyone that I know that's left the country has done so because the IT sector here sucks ass and pays peanuts and they could make more in Europe.
I never understood this "Australia's the greatest country on the planet” bullshit. It's extremely subjective and it's not the sunny paradise for a lot of young people now. I'm Australian and have lived for coming up to a decade in Europe and Asia and I have a much better life in terms of a cost to living ratio. I don't have to stress like I did back home about how much I spend on food, housing and having fun (which some might consider basic necessities). It's not all sunshine and rainbows but life is a lot more comfortable. 

To add, I'd rather be poor in Australia than other countries but the quality of life is depreciating. I hadn't been home in 5 years due to covid and holy shit, inflation has fucked us! All of my mates (30s) are up to their necks in either debt or they're just keeping their heads above water. Housing is up a dogs arse and it'll only get worse. 

The grass is always greener but if you're young, I'd defo recommend going elsewhere unless you like mining or living with your mum until you're 40
Theres no culture, as a mid 20s male thats kinda past the getting shitfaced every weekend and taking drugs phase I find that the overall culture around going out drinking and going to events here to be downright depressing. Im a dual citizen (here and spain, 1 parent from each mostly lived in aus) and everytime I come back from visiting family in Spain i just feel so flat coming back. The culture around drinking here is poisonous, when im over there were out later, drink about as much (slower over time), pay less, talk more, eat better and have lots to do. Feeling more and more distant from my core friend group as getting shitfaced every friday and saturday, or going to see the footy is about all that is done, the occasional gig but again more heavy drinking. In syd being out past 12 in most areas theres nothing to do but go to a pub or club, and no food that isnt fast food or kebab joint. I know wages in Spain are dirt compared to here but money gets you further and theres more nice things to actually do with that money, whats the point in earning more but living less, rather tip the scales the other way.
For me, it's not that Australia is bad it's that moving to the UK means it's really easy to just fly to say Germany. 

I think that's the biggest reason, a sibling moved to London for work and they loved how they could just get on a cheap flight and be somewhere for the weekend or a week.
Planning to move overseas in 2 years with the family. Have dual citizenship in an EU country, taking the wife and dependant through it currently. Once we're all sorted, we're out. 

  
Why? COL where we're looking is better, more remote job opportunities, better schooling and increased pay (Paid in EU or US not the terribly AUD). Better infrastructure, able to get to a different country in less time than going from Melbourne to Perth. 

Once upon a time, Australia was great when we had the community outlook, job availability and mateship. Ever since John Howard we've seemed to move to 'Fuck you, I got mine' and everyone has shut their social shop down.
Aside from the work-life balance, Australia is significantly behind in progress. Our main industries are export-related such as mining, but very little is being done to foster innovation and generate new ideas in Australia.

There is a severe lack of funding to support fundamental research, without which we cannot see progress. Australia is currently supporting projects and ideas that will become profitable tomorrow, but is failing to realise that you need to support start-ups and new industries that will set the stone in place for bigger and impactful industries in the future.

Australia simply does not know how to take a risk. It does not have faith in new ideas. They only see short-term profitability and the quick buck.

As a result of this short-sightedness, we're significantly behind in making us a leader for the future. 

The US is a great example of dedicating funds to future industries, but the work-life situation and general safety there is terrible. 

I have been thinking to move away from Australia after my PhD. It is not worth contributing to a society that only sees my value in how much money I am able to bring in.
Ah the circle of life. I'm a Brit in NZ, hearing about Kiwis moving to Oz, while Aussies are buggering off to Europe. Maybe we are all just seeking something different.
Reasons for leaving: No positive economic outlook, failing social services, failing healthcare system, sub-par education system, complacent and self serving culture, decreasing quality of life. All in all doesn’t seem like a good return on investment. Return being a fulfilling life and investment being my time, money and general wellbeing.
Are many people really considering leaving? Like I know there are significant issues facing us in Australia and I don't want to minimise that... but many of those issues are shared in other Western nations, or there are other problems that aren't as significant here.

The entire world seems to be in a troublesome place right now. I don't think it's unique to Australia.
I will always advocate for Australians to look at their heritage, and pursue a second citizenship. I was able to get my second passport in a Nordic country which had free education, and paid for me not only to go to university, but for my internships and study abroad in other countries.

If you have a degree, look at options for where you are able to do a working holiday visa / get employment with a better cost of living / currency exchange.

Australia will only become more expensive, and our currency devalued further. Take opportunities like studying in Europe, or using your degree to pursue something like english teaching in S. Korea or Japan: you will be able to save money, **live alone**, have a different experience, and learn about ways of life outside of whatever it is in Australia.

Broaden your horizons and pursue what you can. Take advantage of what you can, and don't follow the trends of what is considered normalcy in Australia.
I left about 8 years ago and have no plans to return. I see no future for myself in Australia. 

The reasons I left were: It was hard to get a professional stable job ( I have a university degree). High rent. High cost of living. Low chance of owning or saving up to buy property. Little free time and a poor social life ( everyone is busy working or doing chores all the time. Social life revolves around the pub and or drinking) 

I earn less but I have a much higher quality of living in terms of what I can afford and in terms of free time and socialising. My future and savings are not exactly stable, but probably no more or less than what it was back home.
Because it’s boring. Nightlife isn’t that crazy in any major city. Even restaurants or late night shopping still close early. Going out to eat is expensive. Plus expensive rent. Barely any work life balance because everyone’s trying to keep up. It’s also quite isolating if you don’t have a friendship group from high school. People are not that friendly or willing to make friends.
I left, partly because I find the politics and economy repulsive. Australia’s politicians are beholden to the migrants and minerals business model and the middle class are obsessed with getting rich from real estate. There is a profound indifference to beauty and culture and no appetite for curtailing real estate usury in the interests of supporting invested communities. The rate of migration and the resulting changes in cityscapes are alienating, but Australians won’t give up the effortless wealth that it brings.
Can’t speak for anyone else, but I want to leave because there isn’t community outside of clubbing and spending money, I’m 20 and have felt alone and adrift and outside of my own age group since I was a tween, nothing particularly against Australia as a place to live but I’m at a point where the loneliness that seems to really be quietly creeping across this country makes me want to hedge my bets elsewhere. It also doesn’t help that every aspect of growing up like getting a stable job and home has shut me and many young adults out, many young families and people came to Australia in the hopes of a new beginning with more stability and a place to feel they belong… I’ll be moving for the exact same reasons.
Too expensive, lack of culture, everything evolves around making money here.  Lack of style, heritage etc.  

A lof of suburban Australia is boring and bland ASF
So I *did* leave Australia, moved to northern europe, and have been here a few years now. I left because I didn't really feel like I  fit in for Australia. I wasn't into sports or the beach or clubbing, I didn't closely identify with the Australian culture. So I left hoping it would be better elsewhere.

But for those wanting to leave: if you don't feel like you fit into Australia you will still feel like that elsewhere, and at least with regards to Europe, all the problems Australia faces are the same here - expensive housing, stagnant salaries, high cost of living, diminishing public health, growing wealth divide, unforseen weather patterns thanks to climate change, a sense of individualism instead of community, corrupt political environment - it's all here in Europe too, this is not the utopia you think it is. I'll add in that the salaries are worse and the taxes are significantly higher (both income tax and VAT).

The only major benefit I can think of is it allows you to conveniently travel around Europe and visit other countries, so if you want to do it for a year or two so you can visit lots of Europe, go for it, but to live I would say your life would objectively be worse in most aspects. As others have said there's really only two ways you'll find a better quality of life than what you could get in Australia, 1. Become an expat in a cheap country paid in a western currency or 2. Be in tech and work in the US.

Otherwise the middle-class lifestyles are largely comparable or worse in other countries than in Australia. And I do think Australia has a LOT of problems that need to be addressed, and I think we (regular Australian citizens) need to be more politically active so we can actually vote in parties that will make the changes we want to see - but I assure you there is no Shangri La overseas waiting for you.
I have been considering leaving for a while now I just don’t feel like I belong here anymore and feel a bit ostracized by others. Plus housing has been an issue and job satisfaction for myself too
I went overseas because l could. I wanted to see the world. I planned a six months holiday that became 9 years. I've lived and worked in 5 countries. And travelled to 48 countries. I had a fantastic time and learn a lot about life and what is really important to me.
I’ve had to move 3 times in the past 3 years because the rent kept going up (+20%). If this trend continues I’ll be living with 3 other dudes for the rest of my life. I’ll never sacrifice 50% of my salary for a shit one bedroom apartment. 

As I WFH I could technically move overseas to live like a king and save heaps of money instead of dealing with the shit show we have here.
This isn’t my personal experience but I know people who left and their reasoning.

In my community most people met and are friends from year 12 and the first couple of years after school. Over the next few years, medium sized groups were formed and most of the wider socialisation only happened between these groups from those days.

If you didn’t make it into one of these groups it becomes harder and harder as people have their social needs met by each other and don’t really have a need to make new close friends. The onus falls on you to make plans with people and it’s rarely reciprocated. 

This is exhausting and isolating and unless you’re very charismatic it just gets worse as social circles tighten even further. Some people have enough and leave to a different country, where they are usually much more successful.
I'm 25 and I've lived in Australia all my life. I'm considering leaving for my own personal growth. I still live with my parents and I'm super grateful for all they've done for me; I haven't had to think about anything other than my education while they've taken care of me. However, I'm finishing my Masters degree pretty soon and would like to complete a PhD. If things go to plan, I want to live on my own while I study but I've heard from other students that I know that the situation here isn't great. It's super expensive and the lifestyle for PhD students here is mostly funded by parents or guardians. I don't want my parents to have to fund me throughout the next 3-5 years of study and so I'm looking elsewhere.

I've heard great things about Germany and Netherlands. Both have great universities (especially in Maths) and so I'd love to get an opportunity somewhere over there.

But who knows it largely depends on what offers I get. It might be the case that only Australian universities accept me, in which case I'd just stay here.
I’m not “young” (mid 30s) but I left when I was. I’ll offer an answer that I haven’t seen yet: monotony. We’re incredibly localised country and unless you drive in any direction for 10 hours your life is suburb to city for work, city to suburb for home, repeat until you die. Half your friend group become teachers who only talk about teaching and get very insular, it’s $15 for a pint and you’ll be fined to the ground for minor annoyances because of cop revenue raising. 

My standard of living in Japan is just much higher. The yen goes further, I can travel cheaply around Asia and best of all: I get left alone.
Let’s face it since the pandemic the whole world has gone crazy
Greedy landlords now own the place. It's impossible to start a family here.

Want to not get kicked to the curb every 12 months? Up goes the rent to stay.

Want better conditions for living? Don't like living in a moldy house with cracks in the ceiling? Up goes the rent to fix it.

My interest rates are going up and I made a bad investment? Up goes the rent to cover it.

Wanna buy your own place and stop paying my mortgage? I'll just outbid you and keep you under my thumb forever. I'll even get a nifty tax cut for it, too.

Having kids? Great, more ~~slaves~~ future tenants! They can help you pay the rent (which has just gone up, btw).
1. House prices.
2. Cozzie livs (cost of living crisis).
3. The Australian government is corrupt, controlling and incompetent. The Australian people are too ignorant and/or complacent to demand change to address white collar corruption, broken public systems and growing inequality.
4. If you're not interested in drinking alcohol, watching sports or going out to bars/clubs/restaurants, there's little opportunity for authentic social connection.
5. There's no commitment to climate change, economic diversification, or innovation.
Unsophisticated economy, an abundance of fearful, insular and naive people, expensive housing, and three levels of nanny state (local, state and federal) enacting policies on behalf of boomers that are all anti-worker in practice (e.g. zoning and development controls, income taxes, consumption taxes)
I grew up in the UK, so I'll talk as if they're moving there as distinct from say, America or Europe. From my perspective, the main things Australia is lacking is: 

Housing availability (Don't need to say any more on that)  
Public Transport Infrastructure - A lot of our public transport is, in a word, shit. I live in Adelaide. It's shit. It would take me 2+ hours by bus to get 30 minutes down the road by car. If you can't or don't want to drive, you have to basically leave hours early or pay for a taxi. 

Ease of Travel - Being an island, if you want to travel by car, you can go to.. Australia. If you're living in the UK, you have the whole continent of Europe available to you, given that you can chuck the car on the Channel Tunnel or a Ferry to France. 

Cost of Travel - Again, flights to Europe from the UK are super cheap, because it's so close. 

Access to "global amenities" - I'm talking Amazon, or really any online shopping. If you like to buy things from America, Europe, the UK? Way cheaper to get them shipped to the UK than it is Australia. If you love shopping, Australia doesn't get nearly the amount of different stores within driving range as you have in the UK. I was under an hour away from several major cities. I grew up at the top of the country, it was a 2 hour train journey to London. 

And a lot of major retailers or brands, even if they're from places like Japan, will have a US facing storefront and warehouse at the \*very\* least, but most likely will also have UK and EU distribution centres. 

In Australia, often we're lucky if we even get things at all. Steam Decks, for example, are not actually officially available here from Valve. You have to buy through a third party retailer. 

A lot of the things you'll see people talking about, advertised on podcasts, YouTube channels etc. are simply not available in Australia unless you wanna ship from the US which is prohibitively expensive. 

There is a much, much wider variety of foods, because it doesn't make sense to stock anything other than what's the most popular here in Australia. I miss being able to buy bottles of cherry coke instead of a 12pk of cans for $25. 

--

The reasons why I \*stay\* in Australia would largely breach the no politics rule, so I'll leave those unsaid.
I moved back three years ago due to Covid. Not gonna lie considering going back overseas for various reasons. The main ones being
 One reverse culture shock. This place just isn’t the place I left ten years ago.
 2. Cost of living is insane compared to Asia. 
3. The red tape. The amount of paperwork required to do anything is insane. The swamp needs to be drained. Aussies are being stifled and held in place by the overwhelming amount of rules and regulations / certifications etc etc. 

Heaven help you if you have performed a wide variety of jobs but don’t have certificates in x y z. It’s a nightmare. 

All of this is really stifling having experienced more freedom overseas in various countries. 
the weather, the culture, lack of options. i love history but thats not of interest here. i would prefer an off gris lifestyle. been here 33 years and still dont like the weather
Aussie here.. thinking of leaving to usa.. freedom. we think we have it, but it seems its all going away. drinking in sydney? not after dark we will get ya, over prices at pubs now and so so many rules. next, I love to vape, all gone but I can buy cigs. wtf, I know my health stuff. I can tell ya cigs are way way worse. yeah fuck guns, but life is getting worse and worse. I can own one there. weird but true, I know I know we hate them. Japan you can buy booze drink on the street. this is just some, police are over board, our positions keep chipping away at our life stuff. so fuck it. move to a place I can enjoy a blunt, drink my beer and have a vape. good luck
A lot of people I know have left, varying reasons work is pretty common, however mostly due to living expenses. Majority of them have remote work and are now flaunting there Instagram with living like a king/queen in country X,Y,Z.

They also don't have children and were relatively healthy, I imagine one of the drawbacks would be competent healthcare and necessities in that regard. The one's that went to other well developed countries have said that the living expenses were significantly less in accommodation and food but higher in others.

To be fair they did say it is a huge leap of faith and the grass does look greener, but none have said they would come back and honestly after talking with them the only draw back was education, missing social aspects and family for the most part.
I know a lot of fellow researchers who have moved overseas because they have better opportunities, support, and pay.
For some people I think it's a "grass is greener" type situation. Lots of young Australians are moving to the UK, lots of young Brits moving here. Lived in both, they both have their flaws. I think influencers/the internet give people a very idealistic view of other countries. It even gets me sometimes.
Granted I do think Australia is genuinely the best country in the world to live in, but from what I hear from young people who moved overseas it comes down to two things: Housing affordability and city planning, but mostly the former.

Housing affordability is shit for a lot of young people who aren't already wealthy and there's very little sign of it improving in the future. Cities are basically built for cars and as a result people look to places in Europe and decide that it looks like a better lifestyle.

Obviously those two are mainly catered to city dwellers, the big problem in more rural areas is drugs and there's ZERO sign of that improving but I haven't heard of anyone leaving the country over that, moreso moving towns.
“Reasonable education”… too expensive and the quality is not good.
My wife did her master degree at UC in Canberra and some of the people doing the master were not able to write in English.

Edit: we moved to Australia in 2017 with my wife because we felt in love with the country during our working holiday year back in 2013. In order to move here we changed careers to have a better life. I did carpentry and now I’m a qualified carpenter and my wife did her masters degree at UC. Basically we have been waiting for a visa for the last year and a half while we see how the processing times are getting longer and longer.

It’s so frustrating seeing “engineers” from Pakistan getting permanent residency just because they give fake documents and when they get PR they do Uber. While we were stupid enough to spend more than 100k in getting good qualifications to add something to Australia, and in the end we are a limbo.

I’m really thinking of going back to Europe.
I can certainly tell you I left cause of costs. I work as a teacher now in Thailand, and whilst there is plenty I miss about my home, if you don’t own your residence? You are better off elsewhere.I earn a quarter of what i earn in Australia, but i have more money in my actual pocket.  Absurd i know.  Renting in Australia makes no economic sense. Not that other western countries are that much better.
I always thought the gap year travel thing was really good for this sort of thought.
Young Aussies backpack the world, find out quickly that the rest of the world is as fucked up or worse then Australia, return knowing this is one of the Lucky Countries in so many ways. Perfect? Of course not, can be better, assuredly! But still better then most other places. IMHO.
My partner and I are planning on leaving next year.

The lifestyle was amazing when the cost was comparatively lower but things are definitely worse now than they have been.

We can have similar expenses to what we have in SA while living an hour out of London or in central Tokyo, while earning the same or more. 

Our friends have done a similar thing and are now living in Iceland.

Australia is great, we grew up here and our families are here but it also has an overly simple economy and is so fixated on property ownership as the primary form of investment. It's not exactly an environment set up for innovation but instead it prioritises revaluing a block of land that hasn't changed in 30 years.

The medical availability was a massive pull for a long time but now we never go to the doctor because it costs $80 every time to go. A lot of other countries are pretty similar in that way.

Tldr, At its core Australia is amazing but comparatively the value is just lower than other places right now in our opinion
better question would be, leave where? All countries have issues. You go in third world country and the overall life quality is shit. You go to countries in North America and there are problems like homelessness, lack of job opportunities, over saturated tech field, over competitive supply of graduates with not enough job supply etc. You go to europe and I bet they have the problem of their own. Sadly there is no "escape". The whole world sucks ass sadly. As an international person from third world trash I can proudly say that I'd rather be in australia than the shitty place I used to live. yes it's not the best but its billion times better than where I come from.
I love Australia but it is a racist country
My personal experience of the climate here (Brisbane) is that it's a big wet fart.  I've never enjoyed the heat, but I also know I'm in the minority.  So be it 🤷🏻‍♂️
I'm a 22 year old renter doing a postgrad that's in relatively high demand, I recieve no financial support from my parents who I, in the past have had to help (though never by a crippling amount). I will simply never own a home if there's another 20% rise in house prices over the next 3-4 years in my city (Perth), so my only option is to move regional or leave the country, each has their own benefits & costs, but realistically the "greatest" country on earth shouldnt be leading me to consider the others. I don't celebrate Australia Day out of disdain for the place, rather I see little point as waving the blue flag doesn't bring me any step closer to home ownership, and I feel like those doing so aren't really interested in helping anybody less fortunate than themselves either.
I'm from Ireland worked as a software engineer in London, Barcelona and currently in Sydney 

I'm moving back to Spain next month after 2 years in Australia. It's too expensive, companies have me by the balls on this working holiday visa, same as the UK all about money. Basically impossible to settle long term 

I prefer Spain if you work in tech on €60k I can live the equivalent lifestyle as $250k in Sydney. More chill lifestyle in Spain not everything is about money and materialism
As many have said, Australian capital city lifestyles are among the best in the world, but are increasingly unattainable - I.e housing, cost of living which has a flow on impact to social engagement. All very important, especially when you have a young family. So I’ve left Australia recently and here are my reasons:

1. To save money: Working in a country where the cost of living and pay for your industry allows you to save a lot more is a great way to get ahead when you come back to Australia. 

2. Lifestyles: living in an Australian capital city, you are very much limited to a 9-5 suburban lifestyle. Everything closes early, and you’re expected to cram in the rest of your life + family + kids activities on the weekend. Many other places around the world Europe/US/Asia and Middle East things are open late all days of the week and families have more work/life flexibility.

3. Experiences: Australia is geographically and socially isolated and unfortunately it shows in people’s attitudes. Being abroad allows me to travel extensively with the family, expand our friendship network and expose my kids to different lifestyles and world views.
For me it was education and work. Business here is not as diverse as people want you to believe and therefore the opportunity for growth (outside very few industries) is very limited. I’m earning close to 3x what I did before, with an internationally renowned masters, and I have a huge amount of options on the table, all within three years. 

Well worth the risk.
I think in addition to the main points surrounding rising cost of living issues, poor quality homes and lacking transport infrastructure and connectivity, I would also say that Australia is not keeping up with many other countries in terms of advancing technology, innovation, or entertainment. 

Anyone wanting to pursue a career in these industries is probably at least considering moving elsewhere for any chance to do something meaningful or be successful. 

I see Australia as the quiet rural town of the world, it's a safe place to raise children and its a perfectly nice place to stay if that's what you like, but many people will end up moving to the city if they don't want to get stuck with one of the 3 employers available. 

I also think Australia was a different country for the last few generations, but the conservative social and political climate is struggling to serve new generations with the same opportunities, so I don't think they have the same hope for a bright future here.
People work full time jobs and struggle to pay the bills. We aren't living in Australia, we are just working in it.
i’m bored
Well those benefits you mentioned are big reasons for people with kids etc often. I'm still here but to be honest my main issue is the flat suburban expanse in most of the big cities. I feel like it's directly counter intuitive to community building and the result is a lack of culture and a lack of things to do. My parents live in Adelaide, every time I go back outside of the festival season the majority of interesting things are in the CBD. If I go to, say, Antwerp, a city with half the population, there's a big exciting scene, there's a multitude of jazz and music on every street very often, there are multiple markets, etc. I know every street in the Adelaide CBD, I've eaten in most of the places, etc. in my current city of Perth it's a bit better but still come on seriously the whole city is practically dead on a weekday. If I decide to do a PhD I am leaving Australia and I might come back in 20 years maybe if I need to put my hypothetical kids through school.
I left 5 years ago just before the pandemic and haven't looked back. Got full time contracted work easily now Living in Thailand. I pay rent a month that is equal to what i paid in a week in Australia. Cheap food, water, electricity. Friendly people, great social life. I'm quite happy.
Caution... Boomer rant below.

I was born and grew up here, but spent most of the past 23 years living overseas.

Australia is a great place to raise a family. It is a wonderful place where you can feel broadly safe and secure, knowing that in the main your interests will be protected by a well established system of laws. There is generally stability and a fairly high standard of living. We have broadly free health care, a kinda functional social security system and a bunch of social services that make life reasonably comfortable for most people.

But, Australia is kinda boring. In the grand scheme of things, there's just not that much to do or see here. It feels so far away from everywhere else and honestly, I don't like that feeling. I admit, as an adult with more money to throw around on things, visiting other places within Australia is kinda cool, but there's not much 'wow' factor. I've been to all the capital cities, lots of the outback plenty of country towns and lots of places in between. Plenty of the views are beautiful and the people are lovely, but I just feel a bit meh about the whole thing.  On top of that, its too damn expensive. I live in Brisbane and wanted to take my wife to the Gold Coast for 4 nights. By the time we've paid for a decent hotel, it was cheaper to fly to Fiji for 6 nights. A week in Cairns? Bugger that, a week in Japan is cheaper. A few days in Perth? May as well keep going and just visit Egypt or the Maldives. We have something like 20 million people in Australia. Domestic tourism should be HUGE, but so many operators are just pricing themselves out of the market. I went to look at the penguins on Phillip Island a few months back and ended up spending $150 just to look at penguins walking along. WTF? They're walking on a public beach, why does this cost half a day's wages? Want to walk around in a national park in Tasmania? You'll need to buy a parks pass. WTF? Nickel and diming domestic tourists does nothing by highlight why we should spend our hard earned money overseas.

Then there's the Bogans. When I was growing up, parts of Australia were kinda well know for being a bit rough around the edges. In the time I've been away, there seems to have been an explosion of people who are either morons, or just pretending to be morons as some sort of a counter-culture effort to prove Australia is somehow both the same, but distincly different from the US. Wankers driving around in massive American trucks, or asshat tradies thinking a ute is somehow a performance car, absolutely do my head in. People taking advantage of the wonderful freedom we have here, to just be pricks is really at risk of ruining a wonderful place.

On top of that, there seems to be little law enforcement to even provide basic safety and security for those who NEED protection. A friend of mine who is a cop told me the biggest issue for them is lack of resources. So much of their time is spent dealing with domestic violence calls, that they just don't have the resources to deal with other stuff. People entering the workforce are smart. They read and research about what their future career involves. Knowing what being a cop in 2024 Australia involves, I don't see many people racing to sign up.

Then there's schooling. FFS, what happened? My kid went to school overseas for 6 years, then when we moved here was dumbfounded by the attitude a lot of his classmates have. Being disrespectful behind a teacher's back is one thing, but telling them to get fucked on the first day of year 7, that's another. He's at a private school and I shit you not, 4 students were expelled in year 7. So far in year 8, 2 kids have been kicked out. I can only imagine life for a lot of students making their way though the public system must suck.

I moved back to Australia for my kid to do his high school studies here, but once he's done, I'm more than likely outta here.
Lived overseas for 30 plus years. Returned to Oz due to elderly family obligations. The most annoying thing is the obsession with home ownership and the total lack of planning controls associated with housing development. I live in one of the fastest growing suburbs in Australia and it has only one major road that crosses all post codes and the local river. That's one road. . It coped in the 80s, struggled in the 90s but is diabolical now. Oh, and growth forecast suggests another 25,000 houses in the next decade. No new roads. Housing estates can't even clear in the mornings because of the lack of lighting systems. One major T intersection carries thousands of vehicles an hour. No lighting system. WTF. In Asia locals would overnight put up concrete bollards or block roads en masse until councils got the message. If I was young I would be off again.
One of the reasons is very little investment in scientific research and therefore it is very difficult to find a job in science. But they lovvvvveee to promote the benefits of getting a science degree. If you don't fund the other end of the pipeline, what are all these science grads meant to do except leave?
Speaking for younger me, I wouldn't leave now due to having more ties here. 

I felt, growing up, very disconnected from the rest of the world. I wanted to be somewhere where cool stuff happened, also somewhere where populations were large enough to support my niche hobbies (from Perth btw)
Mining is the only industry, I don't want to work in mining.
I left 2 years ago for bali. The cost of living and housing affordability is a joke. Alongside the fact that the suburbs are incredibly boring and everything is so far. Here, I’m paying $5 for beautiful meals. $5 to fill up a full tank of petrol for a bike which lasts me 2 weeks. Everything is 2-5 mins away. World class restaurants, bars and cafes. I built a house here and have no rent to pay for the next 8 years. Unless australia and politics changes I’m not coming back. Which is sad because I love what Australia used to be and could be.
I graduated last year from high school and it was a frequently running gag that if we failed finals we'd all pool our money and move to Finland (because we heard the education system over there was really good). If I had to pinpoint it, it be a combination of the following: the cost of living crisis, housing crisis, the expenses of uni degrees and how unbalanced HECS debt indexing is (or was, I think it changed earlier this year), the toxic and sometimes hostile culture towards younger generations and the youth crime crisis being caused by unchecked poverty and domestic/substance abuse levels and much more.

 TLDR; The pressure of becoming an adult is very intense right now and the cultural/capitalistic greed problems in Australia are making it worse instead of working towards a solution, so people my age that aren't patching their pain/problems with addictions or substances are flying the nest to other places in a desperate attempt to see if the grass is really green on the other side.
My son is 17 years old and staring down full-time university,  full-time work, and full-time poverty to rent and live in Sydney. As soon as he's done with uni, he plans to move to Asia and work remotely. If he can earn Australian dollars from Asia...he just might be able to pay off his uni debt and save 50k to get a studio in an Australian capital city by the time he's 30.  👌  I mean, wtf.  burn this whole country down.
Australia is a very empty soulless place in my opinion. People only care about screwing each other over for money and the culture is margarine, white bread and sausage, getting black out drunk and watching crappy scripted reality tv shows with the same b list celebrities who have been on these shows for 30 years. It tends to be very cliquey and has a culture of bullying anyone who doesn't want to conform to the dominant social culture here. You don't really get ahead by being smart, creative or hardworking at all as well.
I've been looking for a contract role in the US. You can't ignore the fact that USD has been far stronger than AUD over the last decade (remember when it was at parity in 2012?) and their wage growth has substantially out-paced Australia. For all the errors the US has made they have economically vastly outperformed other OECD countries.


My goal has always been to escape the rat race, spend my days fishing and drinking cheap beers on some warm beach.
The only reason I wanna leave is because we're building on everything so carelessly. Why would I live in a country that doesnt value their land, but then makes big speeches about respect and preserving Australian and native culture. 

It just makes me angry whenever I see it.
I'm not because becoming a US permanent residence seems a pain in the ass.


But if I had dual US and AUS citizenship I'd be gone.


I hate the white toast aussie pride fake version of Australia you see on TV and what seems like half the population that are heavily invested in completely scripted word for word Australian reality TV shows.


I think Aussie pride is dead we have nothing to be proud of anymore. This country could be a world player but terrible US submissive leadership has relegated us to essentially a natural resource stock for better countries.



To me it was always Australian to hate fakes and the way we try and present ourselves comes off super fake because it is. The Aussie battler is low or low middle class and we love them, don't try and pretend we are trendy or fashionable. I'd rather have dinner with pack a day Sharon and her pot head definately has a driniing problem boyfriend and three kids than get paid 1000 dollars a day to be friends with people pretending they are classy.
Grass is always greener.

Tonnes of people emigrating their countries to come to  Australia as in their eyes, this is the place to be. 🤷
Australia is a good fly in, fly out country for work, but not to build or live a life.
More Aussies, especially young ones, should travel and live overseas so they can really appreciate the difference.
In Adelaide where l grew up
Kids mainly, can't afford them here and clock is ticking. But in terms of investment power I can't see any reason to stay. Lets say you have 100k to invest and your goal is to turn that into retirement money ASAP. You can buy a house and about 5 or 6 years decent living in certain countries, during that time you can work remotely in Australia for an average salary and save around 50k a year after expenses and taxes.  After 10 years you would likely have around 800k in savings, a house worth 100k or so, and you've spent that 10 years without financial struggles. You can then move back and retire, or you can do another 10 and retire rich - but more likely you'll just retire in that country and live like upper class. If you can spin the remote work before leaving, you don't even need the savings to start.

Who on 75k in Australia can reasonably save 50k of it? That's the core of it I guess.

(EDIT: checking math on that 800k figure, start with 50k and add 50k for 10 years, at 6% you get to around 788k so not a bad guess)
Cost of accommodation. Difficulty in starting your chosen career. 

Australia is great if you have an established career and affordable accommodation
I'd love to.  I just don't really like it here, and have always felt much happier when I've been abroad.  If logistics and expense weren't such big hurdles I'd seriously consider it.

However, many of the the specifically social problems in Australia aren't endemic to this country, they're endemic to capitalism, and they're widespread.  Work, housing, COL, etc, are difficult in many, if not most, places.
Seeing the trajectory of Australia heading from America-lite to America-max where public systems start to get defunded :( 

Looking into just finding a cosy spot somewhere in SEA and cash out a simple retirement earlier and self-funding my aged care there (assuming the exchange rates are still favourable)
Australia isn't necessarily the best at all aspects, but it does tick a lot of boxes across the  board. 

Then the things that Australia doesn't tick are often also bad in other places ( housing in Western democratic countries, inflation/cost of living globally).

Or countries that do tick the boxes we don't have issues in boxes we do tick (lower salaries or unemployment, higher crime / gun violence, etc).

So look at the total picture and decide what's important to yoy.

Travelling the world is great, and trying your luck elsewhere while your young is  all well.and good.
But expect similar problems to Australia anywhere that has a good setup - I.e. housing costs. Anywhere that is a good place to move is immeadiatly swamped by people with money looking for a better life. We live in a global / mobile world.

So OP is really asking were is awesome to live but somehow no one else has heard of it,
Yall just don't know how lucky you are to be Australian
I don’t think I’ll actually end up leaving Australia but I’ve considered it for a few reasons.
A big one is weather. We’re going to be hit hard by climate change. I naturally prefer colder climates and can’t handle our scorching summers. 
Housing affordability is another big one.
Also, Australia is very separate from the rest of the world, if you’re someone with a natural curiosity who likes travelling, Australia can be a bit restrictive.
I wasn't younger when I first left, mid 30s, I suppose. 

Career growth was and is the reason. Outside of software, extraction, farming, tourism, and finance for those things, there isn't an economy. No advanced manufacturing specifically, very little serious biotech. We don't even have a real domestic arms industry, just assembly and test.

I didn't know it at the time, but there's a fundamental cultural reason for that which means Australia won't ever have advanced manufacturing without a huge influx of skilled immigrants from a country already practicing advanced manufacturing. Given geopolitics, that would likely be Taiwan.

Australians in Australia refuse to be taught, refuse to continuously improve, refuse coaching, refuse modern quality practices, shun root cause analysis, and never want to make a process better. "This is the way we've always done it, she'll be right." Even recent immigrants adopt this mindset rapidly, so it's a local cultural meme which applies here generally, rather than being unique to a particular subculture. This applies from trades (which would be a huge impediment) all the way up to postgrad qualified engineers/scientists. Closed minds.

This is exacerbated and encouraged by extraction wages. Why learn anything when one can earn a mint pulling ore or methane from the ground for the bosses? So by the time extraction tapers off, we won't have the skills for anything else. This country doesn't have a great future, even setting aside its vulnerability to global warming (which I don't).
I wanted to experience something different and get away from home. Then I fell in love with a German guy during my year overseas and have been here ever since.  
  
I certainly have my own struggles here but the cost of living back home as well as the ridiculous price of a partner visa to bring him over are what’s stopping us from moving back. I was granted permanent residency as we were married, paid around 100€ and it was granted on the spot. How the fuck is the same thing in Australia over 10 grand and takes at least a year to get?! 
  
I hate how we complain about things in Australia but are too apathetic to demand real change. The previous generation and Aus government have made daily life a real struggle. I see friends unable to move from their parent’s home, they’re unable to start a family, they can’t pay off their HECS debt. Life is not perfect but it’s a bit easier in Germany. I’ll be applying for citizenship soon and don’t see myself moving back for a really long time.
I must say life in Australia is really comfortable. The only thing that bothers me is the isolation and the general curiosity to explore varied cultures, which is lacking being in a large island!
We don’t know what community really is. Consumerism doesn’t replace being human. And we are there baby.
While I'm in my late 30's and just got married, if I had the option to move overseas to work, I would absolutely take it. I think a lot of younger people are taking up the digital nomad lifestyle. Working in South-East Asia for your Australian based company and only using maybe a 10th of your wage to live, tell me that dose not sound tempting.
I find it depressing here. Everyone seems to just want to buy a house and paint it white.
A majority of my family members and friends have either left for another state or left the country entirely, mostly due to cost of living. Some of them came here from other countries (mainly Europe) and decided to go back

I'm not in a rush to leave, but there's certainly nothing keeping me here
If you are a career driven person who wants to work in higher prestige fields or industries with more to offer than what is available here in Australia (looking at you film, music, dance and games) you are missing out on some really amazing experiences overseas. You can go away for 2-6 years and come back with so much knowledge and ideas from international companies that you use to help mentor and guide those back here when you return.

I always advise junior game artists to actively try and get a job at a Ubisoft or Infinity ward, insomniac or other AAA companies, if only for a year or two. The amount of experience you can get from that kind of stint is really bottomless.

Just make sure you leave before you get too burn out xD
I’d like to own my own house, finish a masters degree, have children and afford them as much opportunity as was afforded to me growing up, and for a person like myself from a non home owning working class anglo saxon family, my partner the same though from an immigrant family, none of those things are on the cards for me here without indenturing myself to debt for the rest of my working life. My grandfather was a postman, and was able to put a deposit on a home as the only working member of his household. We know our value and we know we can do better elsewhere, with our eventual qualifications and skillset.
I love australia, and have lived here for my whole life. However, when I was young (early teens) I went to vancouver CA and loved it, and now I want to move there. Don't know why, it's just really pretty and calming for me.
I’m not even that young (40) but planning a move overseas next year due to housing and cost of living. 

Don’t have kids and not wealthy enough to adopt or do surrogacy plus most of our friends have moved away so thought fuck it, there’s not much holding us here. 

Heading to Quebec (husband is from there) where we can still get a 2-3 bed home for under 300k on a pretty similar income as we have now. 

Don’t get me wrong, Canada has a lot of the similar problems as here but housing is so shit in Australia (including build quality) and planning retirement as a renter fills me with dread.
Too many fines.
 If you’re not born into some sort of money in Australia the only three ways to get ahead given the cost of housing / living I really believe are:

1. Marry someone richer than you (and don’t divorce btw)

2. Win the lottery

3. leave for a country with a better wage / career path  

for me that was the US.
I rent a 3 bedroom house in outskirts of Sydney for $750 AUD a week. My landlord recently moved to a tourist spot in Japan for work and tells me that the house is significantly larger and is less than $500 AUD a month.
Oh, I mean, I probably don't count as young anymore since I just turned 30, but I left Australia six years ago. I figured buying a house there was nearly impossible. I ended up settling in Germany. While everything isn't perfect here, every time I visit home, it reinforces that I don't regret leaving at all.

Although I rent here, I can paint and basically do what I want with my apartment. I had even forgotten that house inspections were a thing! The rental contracts are very different; once signed, rent increases are very limited by law. This does make finding an apartment hard, but once that's done, it's essentially yours forever.

Cost of living is another factor. I earn good money here, and I would in Australia too, but food here is much cheaper, as are beer, wine, and spirits—all of good quality. Eating out is more affordable as well. Despite living in a major city, I don’t need a car because many European cities have excellent public transport.

Reliable public transport is something Australian cities do poorly. It’s nice to just go to the bus stop, train, or tram station and know the next one is no more than 10 minutes away; often every 4 minutes on busy lines. Proper urbanism means people live where they shop and hang out, unlike the sprawling suburbs with random shopping zones back home. This is a major factor in maintaining a good social life. While I do hang out at people's apartments, it’s much more common to meet in a park, bar, or cafe. 

Travelling is also much more affordable here. I can visit all of Europe fairly cheaply with plentiful flights that take 2-3 hours. The Americas are about 6-8 hours away, and the same goes for Africa and the Middle East. Only Asia is about 10-12 hours away, with reasonably priced direct flights.

As for money, wages in Germany compared to Australia are competitive. While more is taken out of your wage here due to the system's structure however again the cost of living is lower, so I still feel like disposable income here, although this may because I am not a fresh-faced doe eyed graduate. You also are getting paid in Euros which has being going better than the aussie dollar since I moved. It's nice when visiting home changing money to Australian dollars and watching that number increase. 

However, money is fairly good in Germany, not as good as the US but comparable with Australia, depends on what you do though. There are defs some industries that pay much less here in Europe as a whole.
I was worked to be the bone during Covid because I was an ‘essential worker’ the work paid peanuts and included a lot of verbal abuse from customers. 
And my reward? being priced out of the rental market and becoming homeless  (and this was despite working full time). 

I am living with my parents and saving up to emigrate to Asia after visiting a friend living in a nearby country and being shocked at the quality of life. Yes its not as ‘wealthy’ but people were polite and housing is affordable. I’m tired of being gaslit into staying in Australia to earn ‘good money’ when its a gilded cage and the basics like housing are kept at arms reach. Don’t believe the stats with GDP and HDI in Australia - its all abstractions for the bureacrats to jerk each other off to. The felt experience for myself has been nothing but degradation.
I've been here for 31 years. It would just be nice to have a change after all that time. I've got cabin fever. 

When my last remaining relative dies, I won't have much left here, so might as well try something new. 

It would be much easier to learn the foreign language of my choice if I jumped ship. 

I don't want to have regrets about not doing it when I'm old and on my deathbed. 

I've had a lot of trauma in my life. Moving away would be leaving it all behind in a way. 

Life is meant to be lived. So why not?
My wife and I are now mid-thirties so not sure if we count, but we wanted to explore more of the world and Australia was prohibitively far for that to work. London has a far worse cost of living vs income than Melbourne but so much more to do and easy access to Europe and Africa, and easier access to America. We wouldn't want to raise a family here, but would recommend it for people in their 20s to have fun for a couple years
They can buy a house in Italy for 90K and buy $1 coffee and a healthy Mediterranean diet, just have to find a way for the Centrelink payments to continue by pretending to still be in Australia??
I've recently come back to Australia after spending nearly eight years working in Europe, primarily because my parents are getting on and I need to be closer. But it is a depressing return.

If I were graduating today from an Australian university with a higher degree in pretty much anything, I would most certainly look for possibilities overseas (and specifically in Europe). Depending on the country of course, there are often much higher salaries relative to cost of living; stronger and more diverse professional communities; a vast array of opportunities.

The EU alone comprises nearly half a billion people. A number of countries have R&D expenditures of 3% of GDP or more (compared with Australia's anaemic 1.8%). Astoundingly, it is even possible to be a professional artist in many places and not starve, owing to greater support for the arts and cultural activities. While the quality of health care certainly varies from state to state, it is generally high quality and very affordable.

Australia had the opportunity to excel and grow in productive ways, but we've collectively chosen to hollow out our institutions, our industries, our culture, our livability, in order to enrich the well-off at everyone else's expense. It's bleak.
The dating pool sucks and everyone has tall poppy syndrome.
Simple: why should I remain and invest myself in a country that has done everything in its power to make me nothing more then a wage slave for the rich with no prospects of even owning my own home? The moment I've finished my studies and racked up enough on-site experience in my career I'm leaving at first chance.
I’m not young. But I did leave for Canada, twenty years ago. I left for love, but I’m not moving back for different reasons. It’s hard to describe. I come home often to see family (Christ it’s a long way). I love the beaches. The great coffee and the friendly casual people. But there are things that I’m not willing to give up that are just not available in Australia. 

My children got to grow up bilingual. I can drive somewhere without worrying about being fined a huge amount of money over a triviality. The cops can manage basic courtesy. I can enjoy my car building hobby without needing to spend a fortune jumping through hoops meant for a mass produced vehicle. Or be endlessly told “you can’t do that”. For bullshit reasons. I can wire my own house or garage without needing to hire a “qualified tradesman”. I can read wiring codes, so why not? When I mentioned that one to my sister back in Australia, she responded like I’d sodomized a choir boy. WTF? It’s *my* house. It just doesn’t *feel* like a free country anymore. (I’m not saying it isn’t. It just doesn’t *feel* that way to me.)

 But the real icing on the cake. The final straw, nail in the coffin as it were. Is I can ride my bicycle without having people scream abuse at me. I like my bike. I’ve toured by bicycle eight different countries. It’s stopped me getting too fat as I’ve got old. Yet I have not experienced anywhere else, anywhere near, the level of hate and deliberate endangerment that I get in Australia. Honestly it’s off the chart, bug fuck crazy. And if you forget your plastic hat nipping to the shops, little old ladies will screech at you. Australia is also the only place I’ve been that has a mandatory helmet law. I think the silly hat law has been a magnet for all kinds of people who need to hate something or someone. My home has effectively been taken from me by the imams of the plastic hat. I love my home country, but like an uncle who has views I just can’t agree with, I only come to visit.
Honestly, it's more a "me" thing than an "Aus" thing. I've spent the majority of my life jumping around, and usually I'd be ok just moving within Australia, but with everything kind of going to shit, the constant shitshow of *gestures vaguely in the direction of govt.*, the ecological bullshit my taxes are contributing to, COL (and yeah, every country I'd be looking at has a high COL too, but better conditions IMO). Also, I fucking hate summer.

Current top picks are certain parts of France (not Paris, fuck Paris), Belgium, NZ, Scotland, England at a stretch. Really the main things stopping me are getting a job lined up and the cost of relocation.
Leave and go where?   
UK: Crazy high taxes, people are leaving there too in droves  
US: Political shitshow, Trump is back in power soon and you might die from a random gunshot  
EU: Far right gaining power, Russia / Israel war harming the economy (Germany is in recession)

Singapore: Most expensive city in the world now with rent double or even triple Sydney for 1/4 the size  
SEA: Poor salaries  
Hong Kong: Dead city, CCP killed it

Where would you go that matches Australia's income level and safety. Finland? Denmark? Could be nice if you don't like sun
As a white male in tech, I left and moved to the USA and got a high paying job within 3 months. 
I got no interviews living in Australia. 

I’ll be moving back with experience and money that was not possible in Australia.
Blind belief that think elsewhere is better. Or the good old fashioned reason the rest of us wish we could in the day, see the world and understand more about it. The world is now connected in so many ways it wasn’t back when, you can now virtually travel anywhere with enough in the bank. Thankfully the youth are getting out seeing more of it and younger, that can only broaden their mind in so many positive ways.
Shit public transport, as a person interested in guns and war games I cannot play any outside games like Airsoft or collect any replica non functioning weapons for display without going through a lengthy procedure, I hate the feeling of isolation from all the other countries and any places outside Sydney or Melbourne is boring because we have nothing

That's it really, the only good thing I can think about Australia is we get fuck all natural disasters which is nice
For me it was housing unaffordability and career options, but mainly actually a lack of culture. By that I mean art, musical and theatrical variety (e.g. ballet, musicals, opera, etc.), and general level of intellectual engagement. Tall poppy syndrome and the growing distrust of experts was really grinding my gears.
Im a statistic.
Live primarily overseas but still do work in Australia.

Key Reasons
- Far lower corporate tax and BS compliances as a company owner
- Better healthcare, shits all over Australia
- More affordable and plentiful housing 
- Can afford better meals
- More day to day freedoms and less nanny state
- Less mental stress 
- Far less tall poppy syndrome
- More social time 

Certainly in IT there is far better opportunities overseas. Race to the bottom in Australia with lots of foreign labour from one demographic flooding the sector. 

At the minimum if you’re young to travel around the world for a year.
I am considering moving, because nothing is being done about bike lanes, and third spaces. And I don't want to be a victim of suburban hell scape cause the toorak tractors and yank tank emotional support vehicles are taking over
For me it was the overly conservative social and political landscape and a lack of culture or any thriving community centres. Sure I found pockets of very open minded people but due in part to the lack of density seeing them was usually limited to 'events' of some sort. Here in the UK things aren't particularly 'better' than in Australia (it's dirty AF, for one, litter everywhere) but for me personally I've been able to make so many more interesting friends with deep connections purely by virtue of literally living on top of each other, lol. 

Also, being able to WALK and cycle places and not have to drive everywhere is a massive driver of strong communities. At any time day or night I can walk from my home into the centre of Nottingham where I live, and run into dozens of people I know on a first name basis (helps that many of us have dogs!). There is a strong 'scene' for almost everything here especially in the larger cities so it's very easy to find a community of likeminded people. Also I find people here are less overtly racist and homophobic than in Australia. Might just be where I live but after having lived in many places in Europe and the UK there are many places that seem more socially and culturally 'enriched' or 'progressive' than back home. I sure as hell miss the weather though!!! 

The reason I left in the first place was to travel and see the world though - also no big mountains in Australia so I lived mainly in the Nepali/Indian Himalayas and European/Japanese Alps for 6 years before hanging out in the UK for the past 5 (yes I know no big mountains here either, but access to beautiful nature is a short walk or cycle away due to less suburban sprawl, not hours of driving like back home!)
Not aussie, but european living in aussie.

If I knew about australia real situation economically, social and cultural situation - I would never invest so much $ to come here.

the country is a scam. Politicians are corrupt. And Economically its a third world country with swiss cheese price.  
People are genuinely nice (apart from the stabbing ones).

Yet the Australia marketed worldwide as a country is always top in lists - I'd say someone in aus gov. pays to do that. The country is at best top 50-100. MAYBE.
I have dual citizenship and dual citizenship for an EU member greatly expands my options. Also, Australia has turned into a hellhole where I'm stuck between deciding to quit work and mooch off the wife and go back to study, or simply leave the country and go somewhere it's possible to both study and live simultaneously.
lol where you going? Shits expensive everywhere.
Pay and conditions are likely to be better in my industry internationally
Leaving for Montreal in 2 weeks for music -  byee! There is much more to discover rather than sharks swimming in a small fish bowl 🫂 I mean that with only disrespect to our tall poppy syndrome in Sydney 🤷🏽‍♀️
"Best country om earth', is yet another American import to pander to blind patriotism that is dangerous ( and used to manipulate in an attempted insurrection there not that long ago).
No one ( really ) wants to leave , but flights are cheapish., can't afford a home , but can afford a holiday 😎
Cost of housing, education and healthcare.
Everything in life has a good and a bad side, having a good job, good education and healthcare means nothing if can’t find a roof to put over your head.
I am almost 40, I got my power bill today and wish I moved away years ago.
Yeah the quality of services and support is generally deteriorating, we have an indifferent governing class, and are being squeezed for every last cent in a rising cost of living. Job prospects may not be great abroad but at least I might be able to afford my own house.
Australia so far behind every one else. 🇮🇹 looking much better to retire. Shopping so very expensive now. Many elderly starting to sell their jewellery to survive and pay medical bills.
Not a place to grow old in.
I‘m an Aussie that‘s been living in Switzerland for the last 15+ years - arguably one of the most comfortable countries on earth. I‘ve also lived in the UK and Finland in the last ten years. A lot of the complaints I see here regarding cost of living, finding it difficult to make new friends etc you will also find in other countries (try making friends in Finland, lol). Grass is greener and all that. I think a lot of people live under the illusion that their problems won‘t follow them to another country. I still plan on moving back to Perth within the next few years.
The education, healthcare and social security are all going downhill fast unfortunately. Social security keeps you starving in poverty. Healthcare that was once low cost or free costs more and more and every day. Education is overcrowded unless you can pay for private. Etc.
I’d like to move to Canada.

The main reason is job opportunities. The job opportunities I want aren’t available in Australia and if they are, require you to be the best of the best just to get an interview. 

Plus their insulation is next level (I can’t stop raving about it), and its so much easier to get things I want without paying almost double because of shipping costs
Housing. It's just trying to get a house in this country that is a close enough to commute to work without breaking the bank to live. Foreign investment has gone too far. So may as well become foreign myself.
Australia is the place I'd prefer to "retire" too. Its just too boring compared to other places esp when in your youth.
If role-playing Kurt Cobain counts as leaving the country then because there is no future so long as those before me and above me keep downward pressure on us. 

I can't afford a home, medical care, to travel, to support those around me or even to take time off. And unless something happens soon I think I might just punch my time card.
Who’s leaving? I’m 25 and I’ve literally never anyone that wanted to live elsewhere, I know people that did 1-2 year working holidays but I don’t know anyone that has even thought of emigrating
The percentage of younger aussies leaving the country for good is quite small. It's mostly for adventure and travel. The main reason they'd leave is for career and job opportunities overseas as well as relationships  (being such a multicultural country)
I would love to leave this country, I'm in no position to go overseas however I would like to move to the country side more everything in the majority of cities is expensive and depressing nothing but grim
I did and I want to come back
Shit pay and high expenses
The apathy does my head in.  I can no longer abide paying through the nose to live in a city I can't bear.
As a working professional, I mostly live here because of how globally competitive the compensation is - we got that in the bag.

There are plenty of nice things about Australia but I have found that the cost (and quality) of housing has largely made those things inaccessible.

Just try live near the CBD, beach or other human beings. Not for my generation.

I wish I could live overseas and do my work remotely.
This thread makes me so sad - I’m an Aussie expat who’s been hoping to bring my little girl back to the country but things really seem to have deteriorated 😥
I left for Czechia and Croatia (the former due to just taking the first place that offered, the latter for family heritage).  
Life for everyone here in their teens and 20s is way better here. The majority is as others have said: social life is far more fluid and fun, better night life, much better drinking culture etc.  
  
One thing that I would say singles out the "western half of Eastern Europe" is that it feels like the only place in the world the future seems bright. There's not an immigration issue as comparable as overseas, everywhere is incredibly safe, the countries feel like they're cleaning out their corruption one piece at a time and the infrastructure and industries are improving. The locals complain a lot about everything but it's definitely on the up.  
  
The thing my family keeps agreeing on is that in Croatia, every year things feel 2% better, and in Australia 2% worse. It's not much, but it really has started to add up.
Would be nice to live somewhere that wasn't so big, or had a trainsystem. 

Houses are also very cold.

We're in a great spot though in terms of rising sea levels, temperature changes, and more frequent narural disasters.
Cost of living. No hope to get a house, rent is almost the cost of a mortgage, university loans are crippling to your ability to borrow, etc. I've been tempted to abandon it all and move to Europe. Norway seems like a paradise.
I left Australia for a few reasons, the main one being study. I had always wanted to study overseas, but the cost to do a Master's in Australia is just eye watering. That combined with the cost of living and availability of work just made it a no brainer. I miss friends and family, and I miss the countryside, but that's about it. I don't miss any of the cities or the culture. I feel like I have a much higher quality of life for much less.
I migrated from an Asian country, been here for 10 years and is now a citizen. I'm planning to go oversea for a year or two in the hope that would cure my "depression". Cost of living, house price, students and parents' attitude towards learning and living as a big community instead of cultural group (probs teaching exclusive idk).

  
I don't hate Australia, I love to say I'm proud to be Australian but the standards are gettinglower and lower, building qualities, mental health, living conditions, education, even new schools are craps with fancy looks outside. And don't you dare saying something like "we're better than so many countries out there." Don't deny the problems, help fixing it.
Probably not adding much but I’m four years back after over a decade abroad. I’d echo many of the sentiments here but really it came down to opportunity. As a researcher there were just so few opportunities here. We’d rather dig up shiny stones than create things. Although I’m not sure I’m really better off financially, the experience is well worth it and I do encourage anyone in a position to do so to explore opportunities abroad. 

That being said, I think we often look with rose-coloured glasses to some aspects of other nations. Many of the concerns here do exist in some fashion everywhere. Except houses. Our houses are garbage and expensive.

Although field specific, Australians are also often quite insecure regarding our in place in the world. Means we often downplay our accomplishments outside of sport. Tall poppy syndrome etc
I left australia with my partner for England and I’ve never been happier. About two years ago now. I love the people, the culture, the weather (from cairns so I love rain) and lots of job opportunities, plus housing is slightly more affordable and so are groceries.
my friends moved to europe because rent was fucked and they looked for six months as a couple and with another couple for multiple types of rentals. job opportunities were similar here and in europe (arguably better overseas as they are actors) so fuck it get the working visa and do it while they don’t have obligations like kids or a mortgage.
Aussie who moved to Singapore for work 10 years ago when I was mid 20s.

Funnily enough while everyone complains about housing in Australia, it’s much worse and more expensive in Singapore. 

I moved because I wanted to have international experience (working and living overseas). Once I settled into Singapore I just got used to the efficient/convenient lifestyle (I don’t know how to explain it but things just work here!) and saw no reasons to move back. It also helps that there are a lot more interesting regional and global roles based out of Singapore so if I move back I will be taking a huge step backwards in my career
Honestly a good approach I’m looking into seems to be getting a Masters/Bachelors degree in something useful then moving to the US via an E-3 visa. Sure, the country is in shambles politically, but a lot of career options (especially in tech) pay so much more, and there are less restrictions in what lifestyle you wish to live.

I’ll take my chances with gun violence, I honestly don’t give a shit anymore. Australia’s great quality of life doesn’t mean much to me when I know for certain I won’t be affording a home here anytime soon. 

I’m willing to take the risk and head over to the US, Australia’s wealth being built off property values rather than skilled-industries will not bode well, and it’s only a matter of time before the dam bursts. I won’t be contributing to this nonsense.
I'm leaving for the US from Melbourne next month for a career opportunity and sense of adventure. I fully expect to miss all the comforts of Australian life when over there.
Sydney rent is insane and Sydney is incredibly boring.
Australias are trying to move out and migrants are trying to get in it seems?
AU has priced itself out.

The balance isn't there for young people and also older people.

Why wouldn't you?
New Zealander here. Considering all we hear about in the news is how so many kiwis are leaving for Oz, I'm loving this thread.
It would have been the best if there were less greediness and corruptions at the top chain.
I’d say not only in Australia but in every western country with good healthcare, education and quality of living. The problem is even with a master’s degree and a good job, you will struggle financially to afford a home big enough for a family in close proximity to where the work is without generational wealth to support you.
As one of the younger generation, I'm not considering moving away but I can shed some insight.

Unless you have an established familial presence here, ie parents who own a house and can help you out in that regard you won't get far.

Myself and my wife are not in that situation sadly and find ourselves priced out of any kind of house/townhouse and even most decent units.

The cost of housing, particularly buying a house/unit/townhouse is insane, the rent is insane and the general cost of living is insane.

We have money for a deposit but every property that would suit us as a growing family is out of our budget. Our rent is going up year on year, this year it went up 90 dollars for a really old 2br apartment. Next year it'll probably go up just as much.

So you can see even with the healthcare being as decent as it is almost everything else is rising in cost and we're beginning to struggle more and more. Admittedly we're not living paycheck to paycheck thankfully but that doesn't change anything. We're fortunate to be better off than many people of our generation.
I’m 36 and I live in South Korea. It’s far more cost effective for me to live here than Sydney and I get to travel more
Cost of living with not much in return. I don't like sport, or the overly daytime focus of everything Australian. Severe lack of nightlife. Lack of culture, besides 'sport' 'beach' and boganness reigns. Amateur hour in the creative field, those with talent and skill leave, or stay and lack the opportunity to grow. World-class nothing and nobody.
Reading a lot of these comments, you’d think you’re on the NZ subreddit. All the issues described are exactly the same. Fucked housing, lack of investment in tech from governments and relying on property + mining, alcoholism running rampant etc.
Let them go, thing is as an expat Londoner now in Sydney…Australians always come back. 
Every time
I'm an aussie teen and the main reason I want to leave is because it feels really boring over here. Like, we're so far removed from everywhere else, we've got a tiny population in comparison to other countries and it just feels like there's not nearly as much to do. Also it's kind of hard to break into the film industry from over here  and that's what I want  to do so... Idk I just feel trapped/bored I guess.
Australia has been sold to the wealthy of rest of the world. The majority of new builds are purchased at a premium by foreign and this has fucked the property markets and raised prices to beyond everyone that lived here.  Debt to income ratio is 8 or 9 times for those who can get a deposit. Public transport is adequate at best but stops at 10pm. Its a nanny state great if you get up early and go to bed early but thats not for everyone. There is no 24 hour economy.  Healthcare is good but really expensive. The private school system is shockingly elitest. The wealth devide is extreme. The natural resources sector gives so little back to the country and is corporate rape and pillage of the land.  There is litttle difference between the 2 political parties. We are dependent on USA and China for everything our ability to build anything is minimal. Politicans are chocolate teapots. Its slowly turning in to the USA without guns
To offer a contra point. I think some of what Australians seek (me personally it’s a better nightlife culture for work reasons) is available locally but the requirements to access it usually require knowing the right people, having the right job, money, etc. I’ve been sitting on a potential eu citizenship for a while but haven’t been able to pull the trigger as I’ve been trying to make things better locally for my scene instead of giving up for the sake of ease and moving to a city that supports nightlife.

The reward for doing this is personally worthwhile but I can see how it has pushed others to leave this place.
If you are a millenial from a relatively poor immigrant family like me, you realise there are limitations to how far you can go in Sydney even with a well paying job. The insane cost of living and inability to buy a home, coupled with job insecurity, makes it really difficult to settle down.

I am trying now to get foreign citizenship in a European country through my parents, so I might be able to see if the grass is greener on the other side... Honestly, I am not hopeful that anywhere in the world is necessarily better, especially for young people.
I'm not young anymore and I'm not considering leaving but the prospects of young Australians without parents with assets to pass on has got drastically worse over the past 20 years so could see that as a big push factor. The thing is though it's sort of a worldwide trend so there doesn't seem  to be a lot of places to go to escape it.
Cost of living and the opportunity to work remote.
Cost of living is way too high and there is genuinely not much to do in Australia.. In Melbourne anyway… everywhere is closed after 5pm and weather is always crap, its depressing
Housing and cost of living. If you don't have the opportunity and occasional luck, life can be very hard.
I'm hoping to leave Australia by the time im 30 (currently 22), I did a working holiday in America and want to go back.

I'll never be able to own a home here and I'm finding it incredibly hard to even find a rental or a sharehouse. You need a crazy amount of paperwork and income to be approved. In America I was approved for the first apartment I applied to within 3 days, and theres affordable homes for sale in smaller cities.

Jobs here require too many qualifications and are too competitive, when I lived in America there were so many jobs you could get with no experience and if you were desperate you could find a job instantly. I got hired in 2 days and had multiple job offers. In Australia, everything requires a degree, tafe course, certificate etc and I'm struggling to land a job at McDonald's let alone anything with good pay and career progression.

If I have kids, the public school system and universities here are absolutely shameful. Healthcare is getting more expensive and worse, I'd rather pay for health insurance in America than Medicare here. And I find it very hard to find friends or a community here.
Young people want to live in a country that is like 80s/90s Australia but that place does not exist.
I left when I was in my 20s to go on an adventure and just never came back. It’s the racism that stop me returning. I’m white so it’s not like it’s aimed at me but it’s an shameful aspect to our culture. That and the chauvinism. Best sex I ever had was once I left Australia.
I find Australia the easiest country in the world to live in. But I find it kind of boring and lacking in... something? Some kind of vibe I find elsewhere, hard to explain.
As a person who was born in Australia, but was raised mostly overseas before coming back to Australia.

Australians are so, so, so culturally deficient.
Literally all they do is get drunk, eat pies and talk about local politics or football, or Trump...and we aren't talking about bogans here, my experiences range from Engineers to Construction workers; with the only difference been in the decorum with how they speak.

It's so refreshing engaging with internationals since they have, mostly, a vast array of topical conversation to engage in. I recently ran in to a Zimbabwean and we had a great conversation about his homeland, and I learned about the Great Dyke and how the Chinese are over there mining it. We spoke about cultural differences between South Africa and Zimbabwe etc.

I said to my wife afterwards, "in my entire life I have never had a conversation with an Aussie like that."...which is 100% true, literally all Aussies talk about is Trump (as their only world political views), boomers, getting drunk, interest rates, houses, Coles and Woolies, or whatever lame political party is in power right now.

So many Aussies do what I call "living and dying in their sheds" they basically spend their whole life working to pay a house off then their ultimate goal is to travel Australia in a caravan before returning home to spend whatever time they have left till they die.

Blows me fucking mind that many of them don't even venture outside of the bubble they live in to go experience the world, other cultures etc. 

My wife and I, as we have paid off our property early, are planning on moving to SEA where I grew up because I want to show her how culturally deficient Australia is. It is going to blow her mind. Staying out till 9-10pm at a night market engaging with street entertainment eating skewers, talking to people and not just "getting smashed" and talking about it the next day like she had exposure to in her youth.
lol where you gonna go? check out that HDI, australia is banging compared to the rest of the world lol
It’s hot and on fire.
Left in 2016, just applied for US citizenship.

Career things:

 - Get paid more than a senior consultant neurosurgeon in Australia (and I’m an IC at a large tech company, though pretty senior), these levels of economic opportunity DO NOT exist in Australia,
 - At the center of AI, again concentration of talent doesn’t exist in Australia.

Freedom:

 A fish doesn’t realize they’re in water, I feel like this is a good analogy for Australia. Grow up being told Australia is the best country in the world, this is true and not true depending on what you value in life. I feel a lot “free’er” in USA:

  - can do 20 mph over the speed limit 85 vs 65 and you’re never going to get pulled over,
  - Australia has an alcohol heavy culture and strong recreational drug enforcement. US (California) is much more relaxed and less drinking heavy. If you like alcohol then Australia is good, if you don’t like it (me) and like other stimulants or disassociatives then you can more freely and safely choose your poision over here.

In general itfeels less like a police state and you have more individual freedom. This has substantial downsides, but life is all about tradeoffs.

Hobbies:

I do a lot of electronics projects. Buying stuff in US is way more accessible than Australia. Don’t have some electronic component, just order on Amazon prime and it arrives the next day with no shipping cost. No auspost package delivery issues, always delivered on time and left inside front door. This is subtle but really adds value to my life, this hobby was painful in Australia due to companies either not shipping or shipping costs being prohibitive.

Feel like everyone, if they can, do a stint overseas and see if the social matrix in another country better fits your skills and ideology.

If any folks in tech considering making over to USA happy to offer advice (DM me).
We left! Sydney was shit. Way too expensive. The healthcare gap is getting ridiculous, so healthcare was also expensive. Food too expensive. And give up your dream of buying property forever. We probably won't be back.
1) Housing  
2) Housing  
3) Housing
One of our suppliers is actually a partnership structure. One partner is American, the other Australian.

The Australian bloke had a new idea and he worked on it in Australia. It was related to a technology of insulating wiring, and based on that technique, one could insulate wire in a new kind of environment but with an insulating varnish, and not need insulator coating of PVC. Pretty ingenuous. 25 different investors refused to invest in this and instead their focus was real estate in the top 6 cities.

He came to the US, got an investor on the first pitch and had been here since 6 years.
A lot of migrants (or 2nd gen migrants) move back home when they realized their city has developed enough to allow them to live a comparable life.  
Otherwise some people studied in a niche field that don't have much prospect in Australia. My school mate that major in electronics engineering had to move to China/ Taiwan for a decent semi-conductor job. My neighbor's kid, he went to Japan to study medicine and subsequently settled down and is working there, because he couldn't get a med-school spot in Australia.
We are a very privileged country but also very unprivileged. I want out of this place.
The housing market. My partner and I are renting while saving for a deposit, neither of us stand to inherit anything, and every time we run the numbers our goals move ever further out of reach even though we're progressing in our careers. It's incredibly daunting and demoralizing.
Trust me Sydney is not a good place to live. Average income and not owning property Yes almost totally slave style living.
The mind boggles. Aussies have it easy and you don't even know it. You guys haven't had a recession in forever. You don't know hardship. What's happening at the moment isn't hardship.
It's not financially stable, my experience of inflation in the past 20 year could be summed up with cheese burger costing $1.50 as a kid and now it's nearly $5. Then we have stupid rent to house quality, I'm paying over 50% my decent income on a house I'm constantly trying to warm up or cool down and dying from temperature then the loads on groceries and fuel, If I just worked a normal job it would probably take me 40 years 🙃 
A lot of issues with Australia could be fixed in my opinion if the government can regulate grocers and and the industrial sector, kick out the Indian and Chinese lnp owners so we're not exporting so much gasoline, stop giving scholarships to foreigners and give them to aboriginals maybe they'll stop being so wild.
Build a new town or city ne of Melbourne commission like  250,000 house to be built, a hydroelectric dan connected to the ocean by aqueducts with wind turbines, electroylizers, solar panels just max out everything with renewable energy, dig a river along the dog fence to irrigate se central aus, have a forestry and salt mine produced by the dam, may need multiple dams one being salt water and one being fresh, there just came up with a hyperthetical solution to our energy and housing problem, if the irrigation works we may even have more farm land. I probably wouldn't leave aus, I've thought of it but where would I even go 😅
I left because I wanted to experience being an expat and was kind of feeling stale in motherland. Now that I live in Europe, it really puts perspective on how much I took Australia for granted and how great we really have it.

The problems you face in Australia are going to be the same problems that you face anywhere else, and if not, there’s a new set of challenges whether it’s high tax, language barrier, weather, quality of life.
I don’t think anyone believes there are significantly better opportunities abroad, at least not in a general sense. Young Aussies just love to travel. 

Lots of my mates want to move to London or Canada for a few years for the experience, but it’s not like we’re trying to get away from Melbourne.
Its a boring country ruled by niggardly boomers. Theyve stifled innovation and fun in the name of profits
We are constantly fucked over by our own Government- corrupt politicians looking out for themselves rather than its citizens, constantly accepting migrants during a housing and cost of living crisis, allowing criminals back out on the streets only to reoffend and get another slap on the wrist. Australia has the worst parenting and nothing is being done to resolve this or any of the above listed issues. Nationalism is at an all time low for me and I would rather be living somewhere that will care and fight for its people.
Steep downhill trajectory on all fronts.

Why stick around when there's no future?
Expensive, and sick of being around racist uneducated bogans all the time.
Sometimes you need to go experience the world to appreciate what you have. You can't know true happiness until you've been sad.

Let them go so when they come back they will appreciate it for what it is.
I’d seriously like to know where these people, if they exist, are considering going that’s going to provide them with a better life.
The vile anti-semitism and lack of cultural safety or cultural curiosity (averaging on a weekly basis the past handful of months)
I’m 38. Saved for 7 years from 18-25.  Bought a place at 25 in a nice suburb close about 15 minutes from the cbd. Back then I was told to budget off 8% inflation so I did. It’s weird to me that heaps of people weren’t offered that advice. I also didn’t blow 3/4 of my pay check on piss and coke like the majority of my mates.
I’ve also lived overseas for extended periods for work; year contracts. I always missed home by about 3 months in. I guess it would be easier to try again in another country if you’ve shit the bed by the age of 30 and want to reinvent yourself after some poor decisions in your 20s, and or hate your family.
I left for about eight years in my 20s/early 30s. Tbh the final straw was the constant rail replacement buses- it took so long to get everywhere for ages. I was also sick of my neighbours in the suburbs being dickheads, the cost of my rent for how shit the house was, the terrible winter weather, the political climate with ScoMo et al, Australian men being revolting when dating them, and just a general "I'm over this" vibe. 

I came back during COVID. To mitigate previous issues I live in the CBD, I strategically book 6 weeks leave over winter (currently in Europe now), and i came out as a dyke. I don't think there's any hope for the politics side of things and I get fucked on rent regardless.
Unlikely that this will be a popular response but I left Australia when I was 23 because I couldn’t really imagine a future there for myself as a person of colour. I saw very few people who looked like me doing the kinda work I wanted to do (working in the media) and so I left for Europe where my career has thrived. Even now when I go back home I’m dismayed at how few Black and brown people I see on TV compared to the UK or US.
That's the thing, Sydney is not a world class city, yet the barrier to entry is on par with those cities.
This is most correct comment I’ve read, but I’m staying cuz as u said “cost of living is as high as, “ it’s the same, so may as well stay here, for me as a new Aussie, it’s just something different   Ex pat American—I feel safer here, against violence, guns, bombs, terrorism, COVID, horrific weather   (Sydney is so temperate, the worst we’ve had is one hailstorm and one sandstorm!), earthquakes, and REALLY bad politicians!
Where did you go?
Same for me basically.
>not only affordability but also the quality

How dare you impugn the finest Australian cardboard that we build our houses with!
As a French person, how do you consider Australia's knowledge on philosophy, history, and social theory (outside of reddit)? I am always looking at France now and thinking that they seem to be a lot more knowledgeable about different ideas and societal structures, while Australians know nothing but the status quo.
What made you want to move ?
[removed]
Housing for me too. I can't see myself retiring in Australia and affording a good life in my final years, granted that may still be 25 yrs away. I am thinking about seeing if I can get property overseas somewhere cheap.
Nailed it!
British guy same situation mate. I work in construction  on a weekly basis I'm shocked how shit the craftsman's is here. Everything  is the cheapest material they can find. And charge you 800k for it. I'm over it.
We are very much a “wait and see what the USA and UK are doing” type of country, not a lot of innovation
Australia's biggest weakness is we reward owning things more than knowing things. 

Our tax system and incentives are setup primarily to reward those that own property and the way we tax equity grants disadvantages start ups here. Not to mention the laws that look like they were written by the US to make Australian tech companies a risk to international buyers.
Most of our wealth comes from crazy expensive property and imported labour
This is how I perceive the situation.
Nailed it. 

Combining the exploitation of these finite resources and the countries entire reliance upon exporting most of it to one client country is massively precarious and extremely risky. 

It’s short term thinking and completely overlooks long term planning. The whole economy is utterly dependant upon Chinas economy. There is literally no plan b.
This. I don't mean to be rude as I love Australia and what it offers me, even as an immigrant. But at the end of the day I couldn't imagine being a young person here, and it's no surprise to me that so many Aussies leave. This country is a bit of a dead end - socially, economically, politically it's essentially a very large small town with small town thinking and small town ideals.


In my first few years of living here after the culture shock wore off I had periods where I felt very claustrophobic. Sure it's a huge country, but there's essentially nothing here.
Come to nz and you'll think aussie is singapore. Moved back here from Asia where I've been the last 18 years and holy fuck nz is stuck in the early 2000s in terms of tech. Piss poor implementation and poor infrastructure.
But where do we go? For those of us without another citizenship the options seems to just be english teaching (which doesn't pay well long-term), or perhaps working odd-jobs temporarily on a working holiday visa if you're under 35. 


I like the idea of moving abroad but the only place I could see myself working in my field is the UK, but gosh they're in enough trouble.
Ditto for biotech - especially if you don't want to do a PhD. Its been that way for decades
Hey that’s why I came here in the first place, my first year working with IT here was more than a decade in Brazil.
What do you do in Europe/Asia and how did you get over there? I'd consider elsewhere but as an Aussie I have no ancestry rights to anywhere else (family have been here for many generations)
This is exactly it 

Is Australia still *one* of the best countries in the world to live? Of course it is, but it’s not all things to all people. 

If your parents are wealthy and can set you up or you’ve got some life threatening illness/disability that our healthcare system is pretty good at treating (or simply you yourself are wealthy) then yes Australia is a great place to live and you probably won’t be much more content anywhere else. If you fall outside that, accept that the pricing of accommodation and housing will remain and continue to become more absurd, you are not likely to see real wage gains and the standard of living that was commonplace in the 90’s and early 2000’s will not continue as Australia’s population growth means few resources spread between more people.  Theres been quite a few posts about food becoming crappier than it used to be in Australia. Thats no accident, with more and more mouths to feed companies are pushing to more processed alternatives with more additives. 

Theres going to be so many more crappy developments like that over the next few decades as Australias population growth increases considerably. Brisbane is one major flood away from 20% of the city becoming uninsurable, and bushfires will continue to wreak havoc all over the country. I mean climate change is a factor everywhere but it’s going to fuck Australia badly and put strain on the system that just wasn’t there 15+ years ago. 

In short I just don’t see Australia dealing effectively with any of this. In the past we’ve been able to ride the wave of the commodities boom and just sit back “she’ll be right!”. It’s a stupid economic model but hey, it worked. Right now I think we’re starting to see it all unravel. The GDP will still look nice and improve, but everything else will be going backwards or withering on the vine.
I have only just come back for the first time in 6 years - like you stuck overseas cos of Covid - and the cost of stuff here has been a hell of a shock. Converting it to where I am working is like "FUCK that is expensive!!!!"
Honestly it’s so relative to your own experience. I know this is an Australian sub but to so many other countries Australia *would* be the greatest country on this planet. Hell I’m just from over the ditch and I’m so thankful I get to live here. If you think things are bad here, try living in NZ where the COL is even higher and salaries are lower.

You’re privileged to even have the choice to live somewhere else. AND to be able to return to Australia at any time. There are so many people who don’t have the options you have.
[removed]
You summed it up with ‘id rather be poor in Australia’. Theres a lot of poor people right now. At least we have free access to beaches, good weather and abundant nature.
I went to spain last September/october and remember how much community and life there was. The food and the lifestyle, it was about quality time outside of work where it feels the opposite here.
The alcohol culture here is truly terrible. I have friends that are mid 20s that look early 40s due to the amount of abuse inflicted on the body. It is impossible to build proper connections, when all of it involves being drunk.
Im so jealous of your duel citizen ship. I feel line a prisoner here
I might be wrong if there's any issues with dual citizenship (there shouldn't be), but you should be able to live in any EU / Schengen country with your Spanish passport
Why do you choose to live here and not go back to Spain?
>  theres more nice things to actually do with that money

This is a genuine question, what can/do you do in Spain that isn't available here?

It's a common topic raised in this thread and I'm interested in knowing what people consider "culture" and "community".
Can you be a bit more specific - what is it that you do in Spain that you can't just do with your friends here, or what is stopping you from doing it?

I agree to some extent that we have culture problems but we also have to realise that we are the culture - if you don't like something about it you have the ability to change it for the most part, so what is it specifically that you would bring from Spain to here that would improve the culture, in your mind?
100% this and one of the main reasons I hated lived in Aus. Both times I’ve lived overseas has been way more enjoyable for me.
This is a problem with Anglo culture in general. I'd argue the UK is even worse in this regard. Most people have no other interests besides football and getting drunk.
My Brother moved to London as well and had the same experience, catch a train to France, short flight to Spain etc. Opens you up to new experiences.
My cousin is living the dream in the UK. Works 7 days on, 7 days off. Has been travelling all over Europe during their time off.
The issue is visa and a decent job
The UK is good, and (for my situation) better for me than Australia. However, if I were to advise a young person moving to Europe these days, I’d recommend giving the UK a miss and heading to the Netherlands. Much better standard of living, better public spaces — cycle lanes, architecture, street design — and everything maintained and in order. Much like the UK, the country is better outside its largest city, so look beyond Amsterdam.
Yep Howard had a hell of a lot to do with changing the country from a place where people had a fair chance to improve their position to "FK YOU CNT, THIS IS MINE". Both as a shitty Treasurer who never got a surplus and then as a PM that sold off the farm and bludged off a once in a century mining boom and the hard decisions made by Hawke and Keating (as Treasurer, as PM he was a bust) so that he could piss money against the wall buying popularity and government.
These all seem like valid reasons.
What country do you plan to move to if you don’t mind sharing? I have my EU citizenship but have never lived in Europe. But I love visiting, and if I knew where I could work easily and make a life I think I’d give it a go.
Yeah basically. Brazilian/Australian here, spent most of my life in Brazil, been in Australia for good now for 6 years. Compared to Brazil this is heaven - despite the distance and other issues. This place is still one of the best in the world. 

I understand the urge for something new and different. Being able to travel around Europe, different cultures, etc, definitely see the appeal there but when I see some of the other (and main) reasons I scratch my head cause it’s not like the housing situation or employability is any better in Europe, Canada, USA. You may end up being in a similar or worse situation and far from home.

Imagine living in a country where any fuckwit can just walk into a shop and buy a gun, or where you need to constantly watch your belongings cause there’s pickpockets everywhere, or being at risk of getting kidnapped, raped, robbed, murdered. Some Australians take a lot of things for granted.
It's partly that but I also think it's good that people who are looking for something else can move overseas to try and find it. 

I moved to Aus from Eastern Europe and I love it more here even with all the shit going on rn. But someone from around here else might find some other place to be better for them, and that's fine.
exactly this. there are so many young brits who go to aus for a working holiday and often stay. meanwhile there are areas of london that feel populated almost exclusively by young aussies. the grass is always greener.
Find a country that isn't facing one or all of those same problems right now
Well said. I've been living in Europe the last 8or so years. It's pretty much the same set of problems here. It's just the housing affordability problem is a little less extreme. But the rest of the problems are essentially the same.
Just had a look at the official numbers and it appears for 2022-2023, Australian citizen departures numbered 94,000 while permanent visa holder departures numbered 22,000. These numbers are "similar to the pre-pandemic 5-year average" but a bit larger than the 2018-19 figures. 

In terms of age of departures, it's actually increased (median = 33 vs 28 in 2018-19; mode = 27 vs 25 in 2018-19). However I'd still classify all these ages as generally 'young people'. 

So I guess the answer is not really, but kind of? Lol 

I'd be interested to see the figures for 2023-24, which I think the ABS will release in December (the figures I've used above were released in December '23). Then we will be able to get a clearer picture of the trends.
Like always, Australia is largely in one of the better positions.  Leaving just to leave seems crazy to me.  If you want to experience a different lifestyle then I can understand it.  Went to Japan a few months back and I could imagine living there, but it's not just a simple decision of "oh well, it sucks here so I'll move there."
My partner is from Western Europe and the more I talk to her about her life there, her work, pay, education, what her siblings are up to  (both just bought houses) the more I realise that Australia is waaaaaay behind many places in the world, at least Western Europe. The same goes for my German and Dutch friends. 

Young people seem to be able to get by. They have decent jobs and a high quality of education, both vocational and university level. They don't seem to have to struggle with shitty jobs. Few adults are working what they call "teenage" or " university" jobs such as night fill, petrol station, and the service industry. Many of their friends and young family are "ahead" in terms of life and employment compared to many of my friends here. Many of my friends have HAD to get a master's or higher to get into a professional job and have worked low paying jobs, studied or interned for 5 or 6 years just to get into the professions. It seems anecdotally, that many of my friends from Western Europe ( Mostly Germany and the Benelux countries) have gotten jobs straight out of the gate with a bachelor's or vocational study.
This is an anecdote but I don’t know a single person who has even talked about it let alone considered it. Most people know that most of the developed world (and a lot of the developing) is also experiencing post Covid high inflation, housing and general cost of living crises.
Whilst I agree the issues are not unique to Australia. Would be reasonable to explore options.
I think this is valid advice.
Yes, some ancestries will give you citizenship straight up, others will have something like an ancestry visa (UK) which offers a pathway to citizenship.
Great advice 👌the world is large and there to see.
Where are you living now ?
I'm in that position right now.
Ur from Sydney
Not to mention if you do have friends everyone’s too busy working to have fun
So my question to you is where would an Aussie person go considering things like language, ease of immigration, better lifestyle and having the same if not better purchasing power than Australia?
Certainly in terms of nightlife and entertainment, Australia is left in the dust by other major world cities. 

That’s partly because Sydney (probably Melbourne too) punches above its weight in terms of global image. It’s really more like a second tier European city than a Paris or London. Eg a Birmingham or Manchester. 

There are reasons for this, but the main ones are population size, international remoteness and local geography/remoteness.
I’m the daughter of African refugees and I couldn’t agree more. Many people think this perspective is racist, but there’s a difference between building a healthy multicultural society and shipping in millions upon millions of people from the developing world to fill skill gaps that are only there because our education and working culture is so trash. I say this is a left-wing person, you cannot seperate the housing crisis and the rate of immigration. My parents came here with empty pockets and bought a house within 5 years of arriving. Their children work decent full time jobs, but will probably be well into their 30s before being able to afford to buy. Feels unnatural for them to have had an easier time than us with this.
That is how I feel. Don't feel a strong sense of belonging.
[removed]
Lack of culture is a huge thing. While you have all you need to survive, life here is very desolate in more ways than one.
The isolation is real, and the breakdown of true community culture and spaces.
Wheee did you end up?
Damn that is cooked.
I’ll add I’m not sure if this is how it is Australia wide, but it’s certainly the case in Brisbane
I moved here 40 years ago from the US.  I had a great social life and life at first, nI think only cuz I was younger. Now older, I’m not as interesting, cuz I can’t get around as much, arthritis etc. My friends, the ones I thought were good friends, dumped me when I got cancer, I guess cuz I’m not family.  So having no real family here, I had no one. I feel isolated here now after 40 years of good friendships.  These people have no sense of loyalty. They’re not thinking how their selfishness is affecting me. I thought I had a family here, but no.  
This would not occur in Europe. So I understand all those here saying that Sydney has become selfish and isolating.
Speaking from personal experience I have found the same struggles. Moved up from Canberra to Sydney after uni just to find I couldn't really make friends with Sydney locals as they hang with high school groups. 

Ended up forming a circle with expats but as the years go by, they themselves are moving back to their home countries and it is hard to make new friends now especially as I enter the late 20s/early 30s life stage
As a current PhD student, please consider moving overseas. The PhD lifestyle is a frugal one and you'll find that you'll need an extra job or two to afford some nice things every now and then like some new clothes or a larger experience purchase like a concert or event. There is also no real PhD union or community that will place pressure on the government to improve how the PhD program operates here.

When it comes to travelling to international conferences, you'll find that because we're so out of the way, it is very expensive to travel to any major country in the world to meet the big players in research fields. Unless your lab is super wealthy and can take on the cost of conference registration, flights and accomodation, you'll find yourself paying for most of these expenses, atleast around $4-5k when your stipend will be around $32k at the minimum. 

I never wanted to move from Australia, but I moved interstate to do my PhD. Now that I'm involved in committees and am trying to help make positive changes to PhD programs in my uni and Australia, I've realised that in the long-run, it will never be worth it. 

If you are truly passionate about what you want to research, I implore you to take it to an institution in a country that truly values hardwork and your passion to pursue something that isn't immediately profitable. I've seen comments from the general Australian public dismissing PhDs in Australia because they believe it is useless to do a PhD to satisfy your passion, that since you are not doing anything profitable, your degree is useless. 

It's a scathing recount of my experience, but do weigh out the pros and cons. I'm sure many will agree with the things I've written, and many will disagree as their experience will differ. But I hope I have been able to offer some valuable insights into doing a PhD in Australia.
True.
The hierarchy is, mining companies, big business, real estate owners, government/politicians, they own it all, every now and then they sprinkle leftovers like confetti platitudes. We are a lazy nation as far as social  and political awareness goes, we have allowed this to happen, generation after generation. We all complain but no one wants to really do anything about it. We need a major uprising, "Vive la révolution" We need to take back our resources, bring back our public service, Neg gearing on one property only, NO big consulting firms running our country and have more independents who are prepared to hold the line in a minority government to achieve this.
I can relate to all of this.
Can't say I disagree at all.
Ofc people don't leave the country because of the drugs, that's where the drugs are.
IMMI is stacked with people from certain countries employed because they could read the language (their home country) who  then just rubber stamp the fake credentials, or overlook criminal history and say 'all good'. Meanwhile, no doubt, a bank account somewhere is going ka-ching.
Yes I was reluctant to use the word 'good'. Let's just say the post doesn't align with my personal views on the matter.
I agree. Australia had worlds of potential which has manifested as unfulfilled.
I have friends that have experienced significant problems with racism.
I was on holiday in Perth from NZ for a week. Being of Chinese descent, I got a fair amount of casual racism. Mind, I still like Australia as a whole but it's a shame that racism is often swept under the rug.
Well articulated.
I can agree with that. Discussions never deviate from property or renovations. Total lack of foresight when it comes to infrastructure planning as well.
You have some solid insights for having just graduated high school. I definitely agree with the pressure of becoming an adult. I'm 29 and feel like I've been constantly infantilised and it has been hard to really establish myself here.
If you think US/Canada  is cheaper...good luck

Its been a rat race in north America for a very long time

It's western like Australia, most places are car dependent, rent is going up,tipping culture everywhere, BIG homeless/drugs/crime problems.

Yes beer is cheaper but don't forget it's in US dollars
>My goal has always been to escape the rat race, spend my days fishing and drinking cheap beers on some warm beach.

That's not exactly a lifestyle the US is known for. But yes, I think if you have an advanced degree the US is by far the best place in the world to make money, and the quality of life for a well-off person in the US is way better than Europe or Australia. The US has its own share of issues but there's no denying they are the leader of global innovation and technology, and frankly the US has some of the best diversity of nature within its borders.

If I could do it all again I'd probably move to California instead of Europe but such is life.
Yes I recall those days. Unfortunately, I'm not in an established field so the US is not viable for me.
Don't get started with aussie tv. ugh, terrible. I'm starting to really believe everyday that australia are full of payed actors the aussie pride like you said is gone
So where would you want to live?
100 euros is crazy for residency. Australia has to fund the bloated and top-heavy bureaucracy I'm guessing.

I was contemplating going for German citizenship, as my Grandmother is German.
It can be, but I see parallel economies. Some people will exist on a comfortable trajectory, whilst the gap between the 'haves' and the 'have nots' widens.
Totally, the architectural vernacular is so bland and derivative.
I totally see how that would build new experiences.
Dating pool is not good..
>Also, I fucking hate summer.

sadly, this is only getting worse everywhere else too. r/europe has threads every week discussing temps
Those are the main barriers for me also.
Calling Hong Kong a “dead city” is a bit of a stretch, if not a political agenda. On any given day Hong Kong is still 10x more happening than all the major cities in Australia, combined even.
What about being a well paid expat in SEA countries?
Did you have a US work visa before going to the US? If so, how did you get it?

Software engineer here looking to make the move.
I don't think I've had a culturally stimulating discussion since I was at university. Intellectual engagement is low, and seems discouraged if you are not in the right spheres. Critical appraisal seems to be absent.
You're comparing living an expat lifestyle in SEA vs a normal middle class person in Australia. That's apples to oranges. A normal middle class person in Australia is way better off than one in Malaysia or Thailand. Public healthcare in Australia is much better than Thailand, and while Malaysian public healthcare is very affordable Australia is still ahead in terms of quality. Sure, private healthcare is great but it's not accessible to a large proportion of locals. Try living there on local salaries and see how different things turn out.
Yank tank emotional supports? I presume you mean oversized american vehicles with nutcase drivers.
Understandable, I have a UK citizenship and could get an EU one as well. I'm in a similar position, albeit single.
Hope it all goes well, enjoy!
Agreed.
My region is full of retirees or married couples. Really not ideal for a young, single person.
Depends on your spheres. Alot of people here are or have apparently. A few of my friends have.
Yes this is all very accurate from what I've seen.
Are you in London, or another city?
Unfortunately, I only have bachelors in Architecture and Medical Science. So very limited international mobility via that route for me. But I agree with the rest of your take for sure.
Good luck!
It depends on what side of the economic equation you are sitting. There are certainly a large number of people experiencing hardship at the moment. Reasons can extend beyond being purely financial.
Being from Belgium and living in Australia, I can only confirm. The only real thing I agree on in this thread is housing affordability and quality. Not a dealbreaker to me as the climate is more enjoyable throughout the year. 

Every country is ‘in decline’ these days. Try to look at your personal situation and try to be creative. I have been very fortunate with a good degree and jobs, but in general you don’t need that much to be happy. I could be happy in Belgium (despite all its problems with politics, declining educational quality, SHIT weather, etc) but I am not regretting coming here for a single day. 

Improvement is always necessary. Definitely housing market needs to get fixed. Apart from that the country provides ample opportunities IMHO.
This has been my exact experience. I left Australia a few years ago, moved to a Nordic country, thought it would be much better.

Turns out it's just as corrupt in the government, the housing situation is fucked (more so even than Australia), the food sucks, everything is expensive, I get taxed nearly half my salary, the weather is awful and overall although I learned a lot from this, made some great friends and so on, my life in Australia was better.

One thing Australians maybe don't think about when considering Europe is that it's actually very boring after a while. When I grew up I was obsessed with living in Europe, but now that I'm here I often just find there's not actually that much to do, day to day. Doubly so in winter when the weather is horrific and you don't want to leave the house.

For those considering a move: would highly recommend you do it in a way that sets you up to return after a year. Go, experience a new life, travel a lot, and then leave.
It gets like that.
Ok and what if you are sad in Australia?
Depends, people want different things. My brother was happier in the UK doing manual labour in the early mornings, than his office job in Sydney. Europe you have the freedom of experiencing various different cultures and social environments, richer arts etc. He was able to travel to different cities and countries with relative ease as the infrastructure is vastly superior.
Sorry to hear that.
The rail replacement buses were a nightmare when I was living on the Central Coast. I don't miss that. 

Interested to hear about what it is like dating Australian men? I'm European, but have been around Australians enough to extrapolate how that might look in the dating context.
Sydney kids itself. It's pretty, but far from being world class. It's not even a tier 2 financial centre. 
100%. It’s more like a Birmingham than a London.

For me, I quite like that. You get the smaller city feel with at least some of the attributes of a first tier city. So it’s a bit more peaceful but international artists will visit and at least you get things like Apple Stores and national service centres.
As a kiwi that has travelled a lot I would absolutely say Sydney is world class.
I've been in the US for the last 7 years and everything you said is why I want to eventually move home one day.
New York. Has its own problems, but pretty ideal for me right now.
Of course a European wouldn’t be able to fully appreciate a building that forms structural cracks within a decade
Australia took the expression "at least you have a roof over your head" too seriously
I've wondered this too but Australians never really had to develop that side, unlike Europe, which went through monarchies, revolutions, socialism, etc. Life in Australia was removed from all that and hard work was rewarded - even convicts obtained property and wealth eventually.
Australians are physically (and socially) isolated.
I am French also living in Australia. Honestly it has a lot to do with our education system (as much as french people love to piss on french education). We have a really strong emphasis on essay writing, literature reading and discussing in our curriculum from early age on. If you are not an academic kid, it's horrible but if you are into it, even partially, you gain a lot of critical thinking and knowledge. 
OP’s thinking “I have no idea how to respond to this, I’m just here to surf, sink beers and bang Aussies…”
Not French nor the person you're replying to but you're right it is very poor in Australia.


That's kinda by design due to the cold war. We can't have a revolt if our citizens can't imagine anything but the status quo. Its the same in all of the English speaking countries.


There is a book on this topic called capitalist realism, its not about any specific alternatives just about the failure to imagine any alternative to the status quo.
This is entirely dependent on the Australians that you’re talking to. Just like everywhere else, access to higher learning is determined by access which is largely determined by class. 

We’re not incapable of existentialism or nuanced political discourse, but - just like everywhere else - it’s not happening over every dinner table in the country.
Since living in Europe for nearly 2 years I can say that Australians lack a lot of well known knowledge (me included). I think Aussies just don’t need to travel as Australia is vast and has a lot to do therefore the attitude is who cares about other countries and cultures. I’m not saying Aussies are dumb but the educational system could do better. But hey lots of places can do better.
What do you expect when the colonists have only been here for 250 years, with zero unique culture beyond that which was brought here by the English, and other European nations, and China during the gold rush? It wasn't until the 1940s that the majority of white Australians stopped seeing themselves as British subjects. We have only ever had the English legal system, only ever had the English electoral system, and only ever had the English economic system. We have only ever taught white Australian history to any great length with a bit of ancient Roman and Egyptian history thrown in at high school level. 

Philosophers aren't here in high regard here.

Nor are those who oppose the current prevailing economic status quo. 

It's not until recently that education and knowledge has been held in high regard. It used to be that those who sought knowledge and education were seen as trying to be better than others. That the epitome of an Australian was a blue collar salt of the earth type. 

The culture we have here is not conducive to the exploration of philosophy, social science, economics in any great detail.

As a nation we are simply too immature. Still stuck in the dig shit up and sell it, cut shit down and build it stage. Ffs we aren't even capable of looking at what colonialism has done to us Aboriginal people even from a philosophical and social commentary space without some dumb cunt chiming in "terra nulius" or "at least they weren't invaded by the French/Dutch/Portugese".

And none of this is aided by this bullshit idea of Australian exceptionalism.
I don't think we should generalise, culture and habits are definitely different but knowledge varies from person to person. Some people are interested in certain topics and others aren't - personally I did not really pay too much attention during history classes but am now more interested when going back (as a tourist would be).

One big difference might be in the docility of people overall: when french people are unhappy about decisions or situations they make it loud and clear. It could be good and bad, for example housing situation could never become as bad as here, but at the same time the job market is way less dynamic (too protective for social benefits).
I was playing Cards Against Humanity in Australia and no one knew what serfdom was. It was the Australian version. My exbf said it sounded like some “American thing.”  Knowledge of Australia’s place in history was great, and you have amazing history museums. But if it doesn’t pertain to Australia specifically, it doesn’t seem to be taught.
That may depend where you are in each country. Things like the speed of Amazon delivery in US metro areas blow my mind. 

Public transport also varies hugely by city. Sydney is getting a lot better but Melbourne’s trams have long been superior in many aspects. Free travel in the city centre is also something that Sydney should emulate - at least with trams between Circular Quay and Central.
I thought Australia had amazing infrastructure before I traveled through Asia. 

Now I am baffled by almost every decision made by Australian city planners. We do _want_ people to live here, right?
And everything  that has to be done almost has to be approved of in the USA or the UK before it will be acted on. 

The vast majority of laws will not see the light of day unless a similar or a set of laws can be copied from the UK. We seem to be afraid to set our own governance agenda using our own free thinking minds. Then when we do we just ignore all the evidence based policies from  around the world that work. 

In the meantime a governance and social rot sets in that is not progressive as we become more narrow minded while being blinded by hate and division.  If we look around Australia the whole country is stagnant like we so supposed to preserve 1970's image of Australia that was never meant to change.

Just look at Sky news  to see what the agenda is that is being promoted for "middle Australia" I almost cant speak to my parents about politics because they have become stupid "sky news mentality people" in their politics and thinking. They are educated people but as they age they have become brain washed by stupidity and cant seem to think without the help of the Ipad locked on Sky news! Unfortunately this type of mindset is becoming middle Australia.

It seems  like Australia has entered a dark ages era where we seek to be more interested in destroying the society that we so successfully built up as well destroying any hope of fair and cooperative society that is built on fairness and the pillars of a good democracy. Sad really.
Actually, we have a lot of great innovation, especially in medical research, but every time we come up with something great, it gets bought out by an American company.
If you've been waiting to see what the UK is doing and then doing that, it's no wonder you're in a mess. I would leave the UK and move to Australia in a heartbeat if I had the money; it might not be that much better but at least the sun shines occasionally while you're sitting around feeling sorry for yourself.
Yeah I feel like we and similar countries are like the equivalent of the dodo. Had it too good for too long, without many threats, have become complacent and don't really have the drive to innovate or adapt to our long term detriment.
More like wait and see where the US and UK are invading and what type of exciting weapons they’re willing to sell us. Fun times
Well look at it at the coal face. No industry policies, you get wont help opening any real manufacturing factories but you get handouts for investment housing, utes and pointless handouts like franking credits that does not produce jobs and productive investment. 

Its really tax stupidity at its best that will lead to Australia's economic failure which is inevitable regardless of what anyone thinks. The likes of Korea, Japan, China and the USA are having a war to be the biggest  manufacturing economies and tech manufacturers in the world. We are  doing everything  to ensure that we never enter this space at any level like we are billionaire citizens and a country that is so rich that we dont need all this " manufacturing and tech" nonsense? 

The executive summary is that are going to be totally stuffed like a banana 3rd world country  and we will leave nothing for future generation except a raped poverty stricken economy. 

We are unable to change our destiny because of division and voters who  cant comprehend the technicalities of a competitive world  where only a handful of countries are in the top 10 club while we languish near the bottom of the innovation and manufacturing league table indexes. 

We are really in trouble and  you can already see how the young already have been scarified as  expendable nothings that is not important since there is no bright prospects here in Australia. The wring is on the wall and division and destruction for the greedy remains has begun while our governance only caters for the greedy remaining sector of the economy that has got all the wealth that they need.
>Not to mention the laws that look like they were written by the US to make Australian tech companies a risk to international buyers.

I agree with everything you said up until this. 

Why would the US have any interest in whether tech succeeds in Australia or not beyond a financial interest? Sounds strange to me.
[removed]
I moved to Pittsburgh Pennsylvania and haven’t regretted it for one moment.

Me and my wife are both in STEM and career wise it’s just been incomparable. Entertainment options are incredible and we love the outdoors so can also do plenty of hiking. Then we get to housing. You buy literal mansions for 600-700k within a 15km radius of the  CBD, which is just completely unfathomable coming from Sydney. Sometimes we have to do a double take looking at the local pricing.

Is America good choice for Australians? For a good amount of Aussies, probably not. Universal healthcare, low crime and a decent safety net are hard to beat.

But you can never exactly match like for like, just what tradeoffs that are worth it to you. For me and my wife, our healthcare has been top notch (and both of us are young and healthy - touch wood) Pittsburgh has very low crime rates and with our jobs we can afford a high standard of living. Most important of all, we can actually afford a place to call home. 

In Australia we’d have none of that except healthcare, which we may never interface with, and a social safety net we also never hope to find ourselves using. But we benefit from a higher paying career opportunity every waking minute and not putting up with the nightmare that is fucking renting in Sydney. 

If America is too wild (and it can be), consider SE Asia. Quality of living is continually getting better and better and the costs are incredibly low. Switzerland and Northern Europe can also be great, but some of them are having similar problems so you’d choose carefully. 

What Australia used to be VERY good at was not being extreme, it was neither really good nor really bad at anything with a generally high standard of living. It was mediocrity but it worked. The mediocrity is still there but now with some fucking massive flaws, almost entirely centered around unsustainably high population growth. The scariest part is, it can get a whole lot worse. See whats happened to Canada if you want a glimpse into how a very similar country that lead the world in standard of living went off a cliff.
I moved to the US nearly 20 years ago, working in Biotech. 

I have *easily* earned double what was then (and still is) possible in Australia. One of the big reasons I moved was because I did not think I would be able to afford a house like my parents were able to and neither of them finished high school, and with only one of them working. So when you say its been heading this way for decades you are absolutely correct. Now its reached breaking point. 

But now we are making plans to pack up our family and move to Australia after decades of setting up a life here. I am literally watching the country fall to pieces around me. Not just "on the news" but in my everyday life. People have lost their fucking minds and its getting dangerous. It is nothing like it was years ago. It sounds absolutely bonkers, like its hard for me to even to believe but its absolutely real.  We feel unsafe. My friends here feel unsafe. At least 6 people I know are looking into getting out of the US with their families. 

We will be leaving a *very nice* house that we love and will miss very much. We would be moving into a small townhouse or something maybe 1/3rd the size of our current home, with no yard and maybe a 1 car garage if we are lucky. Then pay something absurd like 1+ million dollars for it, starting all over again and earning *half* as much as my wife (software engineer) and I both currently do. 

So we will be facing a mortgage/cost of living that is *~3 times* as much with *half* the income. But this is what we will need to sacrifice to feel safe again. Right now the anxiety of just dealing with people every single day has become overwhelming. There is at least a 30% chance any person you are talking with is an absolute cooker. Its an unacceptably high number. Australian's are FAR less likely to be just *casually and proudly* insane. 

So to the people here looking into leaving Australia, I urge you to not consider the US as a choice. I sadly have very little hope for the future of the United States.
Yeah the initial bump you experience as compared to a developing country is great, but there is no increase beyond a point. And you’ll see that core tech jobs are non existent here. It’s mostly about drinking coffees and uplifting UX and redoing things for the nth time.
I’m a history teacher in Vietnam for a decent school. I’m lucky in that I have a European passport as well but you can definitely make it work without one, albeit not as easy in Europe. To be fair I haven’t lived in Europe post covid, so I’m not the best person to ask about Europe. 

Asia on the other hand is relatively easy with an Aussie passport (depending on country). You’ll have to research tf out of your potential destination, but I’d choose somewhere you have an interest in. Of course the cost to living is relative to your job and said country but some places are very cheap to live, mind so are the wages but there are some great places you can find. Definitely worth a try if you’re interested
In many European countries, you can start with a working holiday visa and go from there. You do have to work the system a bit, but it is totally doable, and many people make it work.
Consider Thailand and Vietnam 

Thailand is awesome. You can live 90% of a western lifestyle with excellent healthcare, loads entertainment, food etc with an incredibly low cost of living. A large expat community means you can meet likeminded people if you to ease your way on for the first few years. 

Vietnam has an even lower CoL but it’s not quite at Thailand levels for everything else yet, and not as much western influence means it could be difficult fitting in, they’re getting there though. 

But all told SEA is constantly improving at an incredible pace and will continue to do so. Close proximity to Aus means you can always come back or keep in contact with Aus rather painlessly.  

Being isolated as Australia is is a blessing and a curse. We can mind own business down here and have control over our borders being surrounded by ocean. If you want to get out though it’s hard AF
> Honestly it’s so relative to your own experience. I know this is an Australian sub but to so many other countries Australia would be the greatest country on this planet. Hell I’m just from over the ditch and I’m so thankful I get to live here. If you think things are bad here, try living in NZ where the COL is even higher and salaries are lower.

Some people would consider NZ to be greatest country on this planet, no? If you think things are bad there, try living in Somalia where the COL is even higher and salaries are lower.

Point being: You say it's relative but then you are doing the same thing you're criticizing others for. Obviously, Australia is better than many other countries but so what? Does that mean they should just shut up, stop complaining and be happy with what they have? 

Telling someone how good they have it is not going to change their mind, it just makes you look dismissive and not interested in discussing the issues.

> You’re privileged to even have the choice to live somewhere else. AND to be able to return to Australia at any time. There are so many people who don’t have the options you have.

Why don't they have that option if Australia is the greatest country on this planet?
If there’s one thing you’d learn spending time in any of these subs, Australians are huge fucking whingers. They live in a separate reality.
Agreed mate, can be quite depressing.
I feel very fortunate
But they won't because life here is easier. I work with plenty of people from Spain who would love to go back if only they could see a future there for their kids. I too have a EU passport but there's no way I would go back and live there. Australia being so isolated is annoying but that's a small price to pay.
Probably having a bunch of other countries so close helps, like 40€ flight to lots of other countries with stuff worth visiting. Im into my history so I love going to check out archeology museums, historical sights, ruins etc theres always new stuff to see. My cousin plays in the national orchestra in madrid and tickets are quite resonable (nothing like the opera house in price) so I love checking that out when i come. I also have a deep connection with the cultural song and dance of Spain a tradition that goes back hundreds of years so i go to the local community flamenco academy as often as I can to see performances. Beside that i take part in my ancestral towns easter procession (big deal in the south) despite not being catholic or beleiving theres something about dressing up, playing the part and partaking in something my people have done for many many centuries (search spain easter procession, its pretty wild)
I feel like the anglo culture of intoxication (spent time in ireland aswell and its pretty identical to here) is not appreciated in spain, was there for 3 months last year and didnt once see a security guard at a pub or bar, my familys favourite joke is to get me to explain to other spanish people what an RSA is (responsible sales of alchol) to them needing a licence to sell achol is laughable and further evidence we have an intoxication culture here to the point we cant be trusted to behave. Over there a typical night would be meeting up at 10, heading out to a terrace bar, having like 3-4 drinks over a few hours eating some dinner, then bar hopping the rest of the night maybe to a bar with live music or another spot to get a feed having more drinks as we please and chatting. 

Its not so much that i cant do that here (well technically cant due to lockout rules in syd and anywhere worth being closing by 2 or being prohibitively expensive) its that people wont, all my mates dont get that culture because they havent been around it theyre more typical anglo aussies that just go to europe to get shitfaced somewhere new and hookup with other travelling aussies/brits. 

For my part i have changed it, i dont go out and binge drink anymore really and a result of that has been a gradual alienation from my friend group, always get asked "bro its like you dont even drink anymore" or " nah man your just a bitch liver". Our alchol culture (which is what were identified with a lot) is abhorred over there.
Yeah and I think that experience, that ability is the biggest reason why people want to move overseas. I mean where can I go on a 2hr flight, I can't even get to New Zealand, I can just get to another bit of Australia.
Sounds nice.
Doing what?
With moving there, absolutely. Can't disagree there... And that's why I sadly haven't made it there yet.
This ⬆️ goes a long way to explaining where the rot set in. There are several threads going on about the huge culture in Europe and COL etc, but I’d still like to hold on to the old adage of “the greatest country on Earth”. However, we are different and have our own unique issues- mainly our sheer size and comparative small population. We will never have the cultural experience of Europe where you can drive 2 hours and pass through several countries! We are lucky to make it interstate after 5 or 6 hours! The vastness of our cities makes things expensive, especially infrastructure. So we’ve always had to do things a little bit differently. Things were better when the government held the reins on all of that. Yes, there was “waste” but things got done, people were in jobs and almost everyone could afford a house, even when interest rates were approaching 20%! But we sold off all the infrastructure assets to companies that were solely focused on profits (much of which disappears overseas or is spent on a handful of executives on insane pay contracts). They put the screws on wages and put far less back into the economy than the government ever did. Despite the inefficiencies of government, the money stayed within the country so ultimately we all benefited. Now the only way government can get funding is by taxing its population whose wages compared to COL are far less (but hidden by the smoke and mirrors of the “standard” basket of groceries). We’ve made some mighty errors and have been on a downhill slide for a couple of decades. Following the same path of the mega economies of Europe and the US was never going to work here. Is it recoverable? God knows. How do you get back what was given away? 
I’d like to think that my old fave quote, “the grass is always greener over the septic tank” is still applicable. It’s nowhere near as good as it was, but it’s still far better than many alternatives. But it’s different and we wouldn’t have it any other way. While we’re in the shit, I’d encourage all young people to go and explore the world. Discover new things, see the differences and, hopefully, come back with some ideas on how to fix a few things or at least what not to do moving forward. The entire planet will be turned on its head and unrecognisable due to the changes coming over the next 5-10 years with AI, so do it now!
We haven't decided yet where we'll move to, but the hopeful plan is to gain remote roles for both of us, enrol our dependant into an International School with other expats and then look to the Eastern European countries with lower COL - Looking at places like Prague, Budapest, Bratislava etc. 

I'd love a Switzerland, Austria, Germany, but higher COL. 

Should note I've also never lived in Europe, but i'm lucky enough to know a lot of people over there so get my information and decision making helped by them.
Like for like isn’t the aim. It’s about reprioritising one’s essential needs. I’m luck enough to be a Europe citizen and am happy to earn much less to live much more. 

Alternatively I have quite a few connections in India. All of my friends from India hate it here and are all going back because the quality of life is so much greater there, including medical system. Granted they are all from wealthy families but you don’t need to earn much (comparative to an Australian wage) to exist in this opulent bubble.
A carport converted into a bedroom in a share-house where I live in Europe costs about $2200 a month so yeah the housing situation is pretty universally fucked thanks to funds, air bnb, and investors turning housing into a commodity and investment vehicle pretty much globally while governments do fuck all to stop it.
The geography is a bit different though. Eg you could live dirt cheap in some rural French villages but still be 45min drive (or less) from a major city. 

In Australia a rural village equivalent would be hours from a major city.

Australia also doesn’t have the same band of regional towns that European countries do, or “commuter belt” towns. For NSW there’s Wollongong and Newcastle and that’s about it.
And then when you look at measures like upward mobility Australia is well ahead of many European countries in terms of upward mobility.

 If you not concerned and just want to go home  to your rented apartment for life and not worry about much else till you die its great. However if you have aspirations like owning a house with  a big shed or acreage block you can still achieve that in Australia which would just about be impossible in Europe unless you are extremely rich. 

The last paradise was the likes of Spain which has run out of bargains as other European countries snapped up  land and houses. Just visit Barcelona and see all the "tourists go home" signs, a upward mobile world is not welcome in most European countries because this economic investment just ruins it for locals. This happens  because they have to compete with meagre resources compared to many cashed up wealthy citizens of Europe. 

Everyone in every country is miffed with excesses of immigration and wealth from multiple countries that have overrun their countries to the disadvantage of their own people and kids. Its understandable really.
Really depends on what EU nation you're talking about. Here in The Netherlands the housing crisis is rather extreme.
Demographically a lot of younger emigrants return, women in particular tend to repatriate when they start families (according to some stats I saw presented by Bernard Salt a while back). The issue is how many years of younger skilled labour - also the “cheapest” demographic in terms of healthcare - are drained as a result.
For anyone with a degree, and is share-housing (or worse) and still not saving any money, working in Japan or S. Korea is a very good way to save a bit of money and live alone.
Well, and all I hear about is how my brother is making grands in Australia while his friends having bought their own houses. A friend who moved from Italy doesnt stop praising Australia.

While, I after having lived 15 years in EU, currently in Germany have less savings then my brother who moved to Australia a couple of years ago.
>The same goes for my German and Dutch friends. 

I suspect they are exaggerating or embellishing due to being homesick or proud. Germany and the Netherlands are both experiencing the same issues with housing plus mass influxes of migrants from Turkey, Morocco and Ukraine, plus some of the slowest economic growth across Europe since the founding of the EU, plus heatwaves in summer and cold snaps during winter that are setting records each year amidst massively growing electricity prices thanks to their reliance on Russian gas up until recently.

I've been living in Europe for a few years now and if anything it made me realise how good we have it in Australia. It, like anywhere, has a LOT of problems too (too many to list even) but my quality of life has generally been worse since I left even though I advanced my education and career. Most of my friends who stayed in Aus ended up "ahead" of me in the traditional sense of eg. Home ownership and careers.

Something else people don't think about is your network and family - if all of your family and close network are in Australia, you actually lose a lot by leaving.

>gotten jobs straight out of the gate with a bachelors

This I can definitely say is not the universal European experience, almost everyone I studied with went on to do a masters and most people I work with had to get a masters to be competitive in the work environment. Since lots of people go to university and university is typically cheaper through Europe than Australia, most jobs requiring higher education tend to seek people with a masters.
grass is always greener. i’m a brit, have lived (for short periods) in australia and germany. 

rents are astronomically high in the likes of london and berlin, with lots of competition, and wages are substantially lower than australia for most people. both uk and germany it’s common for interns to work for free or below legal minimum wage for proper employees, just to get experience.
It's the same everywhere really now, especially if you don't drink then you're basically locked out of 75% of the few places that are actually open, if you're not into name brands, fast fashion and everything else associated with either you're locked out of the other 24.5%.
Southeast Asia is rife with expats and have plenty of long term visa options depending on what country you're looking at. It's a good location given any sort of e-commerce as primary income. Local wages tend to be garbage.

The Middle East has some options if you're not biased against their culture. In my experience, the people moving here will primarily be military, high end hospo or have involvement in oil & gas. Again, local wages tend to be garbage.

Both of the above regions have lower COL for food, rent, etc... Given an expat's income, you'd be able to live quite well. You would however want to weigh the differences in crime/cleanliness/support that you would recieve back home.

Source: I have lived in these places.
I've never felt like I belonged here despite living here all but one year of my life. There is no sense of community - we are a society of individuals. Many of us selfish ones at that.
This I think is an interesting point and I fear it's because we lack a strong national identity. I personally never felt Australian, but unfortunately my parents never kept connection to their roots either do I never felt like anything else either. I recently saw a "Polish Scouts Club" or something travelling around Australia and it made me so jealous that these people had some common thread of culture that brought them all together.

I think so many Australians are mutts and just don't have a strong connection with their ethnic culture or the culture of Australia, whatever that may be, which causes a sense of restlessness and a lack of belonging. Not sure how to combat that on a national scale honestly but I would say this is how I have felt for a long time.
I don’t disagree, but just because a place is worse doesn’t negate valid complaints and struggles with living in Australia, I’m extremely thankful to live in this country but I’m also not wrong in wanting to be in a place that lets me in and feel like I belong
Depends on where you live. The US has as many subcultures as continental Europe. Can’t make generalizations like that.  There are places in the US I’d never live, and others that are delightful.
Yeah this is where I'm at. Have not exactly established circles here, friends and dating wise so I'm exploring options. Very isolating. I'm not too far from Brisbane.
Let's just say it's been a rough 9 months not just for me but for a lot of the people I know in my age bracket. I'm just tired of adults leaving us to drown and belittling our struggles when we ask for a float. I could totally understand feeling infantilised by older generations too, there never seems to be any winning in that aspect. You're either lazy and unmotivated, or uneducated and inexperienced as a young person here it seems.
America fucking sucks don’t come here.
Yeah but being able to take a short hop to family in Norway helps a bit
Don't take it from me, here is a Financial Times article - [https://www.ft.com/content/27a2c28e-d28b-444c-97fd-4616ed32c675](https://www.ft.com/content/27a2c28e-d28b-444c-97fd-4616ed32c675)

Sure HK is more happening than any major city in Australia, but so is Beijing, Bangkok etc. By dead I mean the political future and the economic future is bleak. Who wants to live in a city now where the government tracks how loud you sing the national anthem ([https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cl5y3d0dzk4o](https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cl5y3d0dzk4o))
I've spoken to a few international students who have left Hong Kong after the protests, they're saying the same thing. The declining Chinese economy has also taken the wind out of cosmopolitan cities like Shanghai according to r/chinalife. Dead night life, very little foreigners left.
This is probably the optimal situation but then of course you have to recognise that your life of relative luxury exists in the context of exploitation and you are essentially making things worse or harder for the local people by putting pressure on the prices for housing and goods and gentrifying areas well above what locals could ever hope to afford.

It's obviously a great lifestyle though if you can do it, but I do feel we overlook the negative impact it can have on locals.
Indeed being an expat in SEA would provide a good life, but there are a lot of quirks to expat life that not everyone can get used to. E.g. different language, no citizenship rights, food products that can't be bought, very hot weather. Expat life is great for a short time, not for a long time.
E3 visa is a huge bonus to aussie citizens working in tech. kinda crazy that they dont all get used up every year tbh.
I’m just saying why I’m living here. Yes having a foreign income is very beneficial. A few expat teachers I know seem to get by though. 

Living overseas on SEA was how I managed to keep my now foreign company alive post Covid after being gutted by horrible Australian policy, rocketing commercial rents and eye watering mandatory insurances. 

I’m still going to say Thailand has better medical care having waited in ED in Australia for 8 hours with chest pain before even getting a blood test or heart monitor put on. 
Those who are working even on close to minimum wage can afford a decent meal and private room in Thailand. Many Australians and students cannot right now. I’ve seen the government hospitals, they are not good but acceptable.

In terms of living with a disability or being a generational Centrelink bum, yea you’re screwed in Asia. If you work hard there are many opportunities.
Manchester
Save some money and go visit a third world country or a place that had has a recent natural disaster.
In my experience they're disgusting 😂 they want 50/50 financially but still did nothing around the house, bad hygiene, weaponised incompetence, a lot of them have problematic views around sex, women, drugs/alcohol and gambling, domestic violence is a HUGE problem which is normalised, and I just in general felt sexually harassed constantly- like I was a blow up doll or something and I was a prude for not wanting to send nudes. A lot of the time the sex was rough and they were doing stupid shit they'd seen in porn which might look appealing on a video but feels awful IRL. These issues are also present in European men (in similar ratios for a lot of cultures as there is overlap there with Aussies) which is why I simply stopped dating men entirely. I am obviously unable to change my sexuality but luckily I am queer so I just refuse to date or entertain men any more as they don't meet my requirements for an acceptable partner.
We think we’re so big and important because we’re surrounded mostly by tiny isolated islands
Fair suck of the sav, Sydney is probably really a tier 2 global city. Its issue is that it and Melbourne is all we have with a whole lot of nothing in between.

Compare this to Europe or the US where you have multiple tier 1/2/3 cities all a few hundred kms apart
According to the GaWC study it’s an “alpha” city. (NY and London being Alpha++). Melbourne is an Alpha- for reference. 

Interestingly - the other 2 groups here list Melbourne in the top 10 ahead of Sydney:  https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_city
Made the exact same move for the same reasons myself this year!
Let's not forget the mould.I once overhead a real estate agent describe a mouldy bedroom wall as a "living wall" ...
Lol I had a builder tell me that honeycombing (poorly compacted concrete showing air bubbles on the surface) in a concrete wall was nothing to be worried about, and in fact, it was something that people paid actually extra for the architectural aesthetic.
It's actually not that bad, sure it gets cold inside more than outside during winter and hot more than outside during summer. 
And have you seen our beaches. It's a separate thing you can only afford 1.5 hr away homes but hey they are stunning.
You got a decade out of yours?!?
Australia is a lucky country run mainly by second rate people who share its luck. It lives on other people's ideas, and, although its ordinary people are adaptable, most of its leaders (in all fields) so lack curiosity about the events that surround them that they are often taken by surprise.

- Donald Horne, 1964
[deleted]
I think that it is very cultural in France to discuss, debate even of controversial topics. But in Australia, people, I noticed, tend to have a much lenient approach about all of this. Their anxiety about the world is probably much better for their health but it does lead, in my opinion, to a big disconnection about world realities.
This is very funny.

Being from a Northern city I was exposed to loads more culture in Melbourne than was available back home.



https://www.dailymotion.com/video/x2iom1b
Some countries have those concepts as part of their foundational education at a young age. It's not just 'depends on who you talk to', or 'how educated you are' because its part of the curriculum just like English or Maths.

I read a thread on r/canberra, which is supposedly the highest educated city in Australia, and full of people directly working in governance. They didn't understand the value of a co-op or commune... Co-ops are everywhere in France. One of the biggest banks in Finland is a co-op... Part of my uni studies there was learning about collective bargaining and joining a union...
And the speed of Amazon delivery relies on part  on the awful  Amazon workers conditions.
They just want to build infrastructure, then hock it off to their mates and we get charged an arm a leg to use it ..
It’s fucking infuriating, we as a country seem to long to preserve the “good old days” and ignore the present/future rather than promote innovative ideas. It’s how we got stuck with the shitty NBN (and infrastructure) we have now.
Many of them are to help Australia spy for the 5 eyes, the US being the biggest member and has used Australia in the past to carry out activities that their laws explicitly forbid their agencies doing. The US is also the largest tech sector in the world and American companies benefit from other countries competitive disadvantages.
How’d you guys get the ability to work in America? Were you sponsored by the companies you work at? Or have American citizenship?
Off topic,  but I'm interested in your opinion as to why Canada has gone off a cliff?
I'm rebuilding the entire website for a major retailer in the latest next js framework but there's no real functional difference between the old and new. What's changed though is the backend system that handles ecommerce and business processes. So uplifiting UI might be trivial but it's usually the tip of the iceberg.
I might as well be an exception to that rule then, since I got here ~6 years ago I managed to raise all the way to the top of my career, bringing a bunch of people along and multiplying my income. What I see happening is that now everyone wants to be in tech attracted by just high figures and no passion for it, making it increasingly more competitive and leaving most candidates out because they are not doing nearly enough to stand out from the competition.

I do have several friends that moved to Europe and came back in a couple years saying they can actually do more and earn more here, only exception to that I’ve seen in my network is US.
Move to Asia to shit up their countries haha. See how they like it.
Or maybe it's you who lives in a separate reality because you don't want to or can't understand why other people would have a problem with the country. You're just outright dismissing and insulting them as "huge fucking whingers" without listening and engaging with other people.

No one is going to be convinced that their ideas are wrong by a random Reddit user "whinging" about them into the void.
Something I've always wondered is, don't you have something to do the next morning?

What you're describing sounds great to me, truly, but I have to get up at a reasonable hour the next day.
I agree we have an issue with alcohol sure, but for your part, why do you need to start at 10? Just start your evening at 6 and do the same thing - take some friends to a quiet bar, have a couple of drinks, have some food, listen to some music. This sounds more like a problem with your friend group than it does with the inherent culture or infrastructure, like sure maybe you need to start earlier instead of 10PM but from a practical lens nobody in Australia wants to start their night at 10.

Change the time to 6 and I'd gladly partake in something like this, and there'd be others who would too - sounds like you need to find some friends that better fit your vibe though
It took me 2 hours to get to Uni here.
Not the commenter you replied to but possibly working on ships / with airlines. I live in the Nordics and do the same. Basically get a mini holiday every time I go home and earn enough so that I can afford travelling cheaply if I want to.
I was still a kid when Howard became Treasurer but I WAS old enough to have a basic idea of what was going on. My dad was out of work for years (sending out probably 250-300 applications a year for anything he could possibly do) when Howard was Treasurer. It was not a happy time for my family, with almost everything except food having to be secondhand and having the cheapest food available. 

I was in senior high school when Hawke got in and his Accord and other policies got the stagflation that Howard left us with under control. Then when Howard got in as PM he started flogging off everything that was paying a dividend into the govt coffers - which btw reduces the need to tax people to provide government services - to his rich mates. 

Now anything that was contributing to the public good has been sold off to big business - corporatising profits and socialising losses when it should be the other way round in a healthy economy or at least keeping things like the Commonwealth (ironic name now) bank and utilities in public hands. It has been both a federal and state shitshow of privatisation.

Somewhere along the way he managed to get the middle class invested in the idea that the only way they could get ahead was to shit on those who were struggling. Oz is definitely not the country I grew up in and it pains me. 

I will be celebrating his death like the UK celebrated Maggot Thatcher carking it. And he will deserve it.
Yep, 100% 

I moved to Pittsburgh Pennsylvania and haven’t regretted it for one moment.

Me and my wife are both in STEM and career wise it’s just been incomparable. Entertainment options are incredible and we love the outdoors so can also do plenty of hiking. Then we get to housing. You buy literal mansions for 600-700k within a 15km radius of the  CBD, which is just completely unfathomable coming from Sydney. Sometimes we have to do a double take looking at the local pricing. 

Is America good choice for Australians? For a good amount of Aussies, no it wouldn’t be. Universal healthcare, low crime decent safety net are hard to beat. 

But like you said, it’s not about exactly matching like for like, just what tradeoffs are worth it to you. For us, our healthcare is top notch and both of us are young and healthy, Pittsburgh has very low crime rates and with our jobs we can afford a high standard of living. Most importantly we can afford a place to call home. 

In Australia we’d have none of that except healthcare, which we may never interface with, and a social safety net we also never hope to find ourselves using. We benefit from a higher paying career opportunity every minute we’re alive and soon will benefit from the comfort of our own home and not the nightmare that is fucking renting in Sydney. It was the right choice to make, but I just feel sorry for the generation of young Australians that have been locked out. There should be guillotines in the streets over this, there might be soon if the madness keeps going.
That’s the thing. Things might be worse in some other countries but the social aspects and the enjoyment of life is higher in other countries. Australia has become really boring to the average person. Most people can’t even afford to travel because everything is so damn expensive. I don’t even go out much because I can’t afford that. So most people are just staying at home.
Yep! The city I'm in is building thousands of apartments a year but the price them high and drip out supply... Some entire apartments blocks are rent only to corporate landlords as well.

Housing should never have become a commodity.
I know what you're saying but it's still a bit of a mixed bag with the commute. Fuel prices here are higher on average than Australia, though distances are shorter in a lot of cases so it should even out. Then you have to factor in the "Green Zones" in cities where you can't drive certain cars etc for pollution control. So you quite often have to park outside of the zone and take a bus or something in. 

You also generally have lower wages than in Australia as well and the VAT (GST essentially) is 20-23% on most things. It's very similar when you scale all the different factors in at the end of the day. But housing is still the biggest issue.
Yup. This is what people who point out big European cities are just as more or expensive don't realise. The core is expensive because a lot of them are quite small and these days really just for tourists and wealthy foreigners.

That and people don't live in houses so of course trying to buy a quarter acre freestanding house is more expensive in Europe.They're related.

In the time it takes to go 20km in Sydney in a lot of places you can be 100km.away in a regional city and by regional I don't mean a Bunnings and a Kmart like in Australia but a highly walkable city with most everything you need where you don't get robbed by disaffected youth and meth heads if you're out after dark.
My partner recently turned down a transfer there because it wasn't worth it. Fun times alright!
A good point! 

Having a look at the ABS numbers, in the 5 years pre-pandemic the average was 77,000 returning Australian citizens. 2022-23 was quite a bit lower with 59,000 returning AU citizens. 

The average age of migrant arrivals was 27 (median) and 25 (mode); roughly the same as pre-pandemic (26/23). But the data doesn't seem to be granular enough to give average age of returning citizens specifically, so I'd say these numbers are skewed young by international students.
While I don't know about Japan or Korea specifically, I work in Singapore now and earn juuust a bit above what I would normally get paid in Australia.

Plus, working in Japan or Korea isn't as simple as applying there and hoping for the best. Besides actually being qualified for the job, there may be language or visa barriers.
>> Japan 

You gotta be kidding me right? Wage in Japan is very low compared to to Australia due to exchange rate, cost of living is crazy high for the money they make on average, whatever you managed to save will be peanuts when you (most likely) move back out of Japan.
Really depends what you do. Teaching English does not pay well even with lower cost of living.
I don't know alot about Italy but I have heard that it's hard there. Obviously my info is anecdotal and maybe not the average experience. Most of my German friends are from the South so maybe that makes a difference. Again, most of my info is anecdotal so may not be the average experience. But I feel like they are doing much better, at least in the Netherlands and Belgium.
I see what you mean and I appreciate the run down. You clearly know more than me as you have lived I'm Europe and I have not. But they people I know are definitely not lying or embelishing. I know them rather well and some are basically family. I know some of them have lived at home for a long time which helps with saving, but one guy know has bought a house and is a security guard / tram conductor. Again, specific and anecdotal cases but I just couldn't imagine that happening in Australia. 

I think we have a better quality of life and are more relaxed in Aus. The work life balance doesn't seem great I'm Europe and the weather is depressing.
> if you’re not biased against their culture

ie gay or female?
a lot of anglophone countries are like that :( we dont have it as bad as America but I wouldn't call it good regardless
I was born in th UK, and my parents are European and South African. I resonate far more with those cultures, than anything in Australia and I've been here for 20 years.
Home ownership is the core of Australian national identity. Now that's out of reach for most young Aussies, the ennui is setting in.
[removed]
I did a working holiday in Canada for a couple years and made a very strong circle of friends. Everyone is there starting anew and out keen to make friends so it’s remarkably easy
Fair enough. I agree that there's too much regulation and redtape and that hampers businesses in Australia. It's much easier to do business in Thailand or Malaysia. However, the average Australian is still generally much better off than their counterparts in those countries. Australian salaries are much higher and that reflects in a higher COL compared to Thailand/Malaysia. There's also a strong social safety net in Australia that's non-existent in those countries.

I find it hard to believe those on minimum wage can afford a decent place to live in Thailand, especially in Bangkok, which is more expensive than KL these days. Food is cheap though, so I give you that. 

As someone who is actually from Malaysia and has the experience of working in both Australia and Malaysia on a local non-expat salary, my overall purchasing power is still better here. Besides food and rent, everything else isn't really that much cheaper in Malaysia, and some big ticket items like cars and electronics are actually more expensive given that you have to work twice as hard to buy the same product an Aussie can e.g. an iPhone. While getting a household maid is cheap, the lower labour costs reflect the exploitative working conditions there. Australia still takes much better care of its citizens compared to Thailand/Malaysia. SEA can be absolutely amazing if you're a business owner or if you're being paid an expat salary, but otherwise it's a grind for the general working man.
Damn, sorry to hear this was your experience. Sounds dreadful and I don't blame you. I've certainly seen some of these issues in my line of work. I've only really started dating, with no success, so I'm pretty naive to it all.
It’s more that we’re the biggest that Australia has got. So we get stuff we might otherwise not be entitled to - such as global standing - if it was based on population or whatever alone.
There's no real reason to live 1.5hrs away when there is so much beach around Australia. When I was looking for a house on the outskirts of Sydney, it was the same price to live in Penrith as it was to buying a house in the Central Coast or Wollongong and roughly the same travel time to CBD
Except it's not lucky anymore!
I’ve returned with my family after 14 years, making friends especially after kids is pretty difficult, harder is keeping them as I found Melbourne very transient, people move across town, interstate, poms go back home, maybe it’s just me 😁
Loved the place and seriously prefer identifying as Aussie rather than a Pom
UK is its own worst enemy, morons voting for morons, place is fucked with no real end in sight.

Sorry off topic
I find the part about close knit friends really interesting, as the same issue is said a lot about Germany (where I currently am). I think it's the same issue no matter where you are. The people they grew up there have people and communities they grew up with... It's finding the others (but that's pretty close to  impossible in a village)
How is it advertised overseas?
You should try Perth. No culture at all. An intellectual desert.
Unfortunately, if you had said this 20 years ago, I'd have disagreed, which makes me think it's getting worse. 

It seems that in the last 50 years, our politicians have only been trying to achieve Australia becoming the USA. Purely to take advantage of us like they do their citizens. 

I was so close to moving to Italy 8 years ago and regret not going now
I also think that the Australian education system and culture has ill-equiped us to think deeply about the world and articulate our thoughts. Like for example, I met a French person who said “the political temperature when Trump was elected was high”. I can’t imagine an Australian ever wording it like that.
At least we have massive prawns.
It’s entirely unsurprising to me that people in our neoliberal, US-aligned government aren’t pro-commune. But I work with young people, and those tides are turning. We’re getting sick of it. And of the government that increasingly fails to acknowledge or act on our concerns.

I interpreted the discussion about Australian’s awareness of politics, philosophy and anti-establishment thinking. A great many of us are. Are we as open-minded and engaged as I perceive the French to be? No, we’re not. But we’re not all mindless fools either. 

Many of us (myself included) look to the French with admiration but are still in the neonatal stages of developing the kind of momentum that the French appear to have when it comes to mobilising political outrage.
Yes, it’s not necessarily a good thing at all. Same with fast food delivery. But it’s still impressive what the US capability is with “last mile” logistics.
I got the E3 visa (exclusive to Australian citizens) which yes, does require sponsorship from the company, but can be easier than you think, and MUCH easier than other Visas. Wife was able to get E3D, which the spousal version of that Visa, and doesn’t need sponsorship at all, so technically has better work rights than the primary E3 Visa holder.  

Visa is renewable indefinitely, but after a few years a lot of people get their employers to spring for a Greencard which very easy for sponsoring company to do. Makes things much easier and opens up even more opportunities employment wise.
I guess its just cultural, its rare to have dinner before 10pm in spain, we do also have siesta each day where most workers go home for lunch and have a rest, Its also not to commom to work far from where you live.
Yeah honestly I guess that is quite true, also being at a weird transition age ads to it but its easier said than done, making new friends is tough and this is definitely not an issue with only my friend group, I'd say its similar for many aussies my age, just seeing what the international perception of young aussie tourists is paints a pretty bleak picture.
Shit... That's sucks.
Good to read your take. Apart from the shit show that has become housing and cost of living now, I think Australia provides a good safety net for people at lower incomes and the vulnerable (eg., high minimum wage, Medicare, NDIS, Centrelink), but really limits opportunities and social mobility for professionals. Similar to you, in my profession I can easily add the AUD equivalent of 35k to my salary just by moving to the US, and we could actually buy a house there. Australia isn’t doing much for me anymore, but I’m expected to keep giving in endless taxes and HECS repayments to pay for the pensions of people who, unlike me, own a home and got free uni. The social contract has eroded in this country.
oh I didn't write as an English teacher in this comment. I meant doing that, which requires having any bachelor degree. Korea and Japan have a lot cheaper accommodation costs (often included in the contract). 

If you have a career, than obviously it's not the best choice... but we're talking young people who might not even be able to get a job outside of hospo/retail, and can't afford to live alone. Living alone would be enough for me to leave Australia again.
Working as an English teacher is pretty much as simple as applying and hoping for the best, lol. It sounds crazy but it really is that easy. Your visa is tied to the job itself so you actually get the job first and then they handle the visa process.
The hours in Singapore are more than in Australia I understand. 10hrs . But accessibility is a lot easier compared to those in Australia wherein  travely1hr to city and back is common
what  is  the  work  culture like in  Singapore?  it's  a  lovely  place  for  a holiday!
Also a country considered to have one of the worst work-life balances in the world.
I saved about 15k aud/year 10 years ago working 20hours a week in Korea. I would assume even saving 10k a year full time would be enough for some people, which I would think is still viable with paid accommodation (usually part of teachers contract in Korea) and being frugal while still being able to go out and eat and drink cheaply more than once a week.

no weed tho
Theres hundreds of Youtube videos, Reddit posts for various countries like Korea, Japan and Thailand. English teaching is a low paying job and  is so bad it considered damaging to your chances of marrying a local because its a poverty stricken wage. 

If you are young and cant  make it in the tech or manufacturing economy you are gone. Even in places like China does not want foreigners in their services industry. In China to really get a job as professional English teach in any Chinese university you have to be almost over qualified with multiple degrees.  Teaching vocational certificates are not acceptable in China. 

As Chinas economy is slowing down they are gearing their economy up for the local service sector and put simply foreigners wont be figuring prominently like Australia thinks in this sector. They dont need Australia or Australian companies  with unproven service economy advice. Its not being kind to Australia but that's the reality. 

A visit to Shanghai, Shenzhen or Beijing surely will make you wonder what Australia can offer China. They are so advanced and ahead of us on so many fronts we would struggle to compete with what is being thought of and being built in Chinese cities. Australia's   industries in general  are not even in the game when compared to similar Chinese companies. Its not that us as a people cant do it, its our politicians who wont invest in our talent and companies  to give us a chance to build world leading anything.
In my experience living in the middle east, there were plenty of gay men and women. Yes, they expect modesty and are backwards in terms of equality between men and women, but the younger generation is more in line with western convention in terms of equal rights for both women and gay people.

I am not muslim and am not from the middle east, but I've lived in enough places that I understand that different countries have different ways of life. If I didn't like it and I couldn't work around it, I wouldn't live there. Hence my mention of bias.
Also from the US. Have spent a significant amount of time in Australia and the UK. Lived in NJ, NYC, Philly, and Ohio. Did grad school in DC. Traveled to 40/50 states. 6/7 continents. Two  things are true no matter what. You can’t take a place’s temperature if you’re just passing through, and everywhere is great if you have money.
Agree with what you’re saying.

I’d certainly not want to live on local wages or expect to get ahead that way.

For Thailand a half educated adult can make 10-15k/baht pretty easily. A basic single room apartment is under 3000/baht a month in Chiang Mai city. Poverty and job opportunities certainly suck, especially outside of the major cities.

When I was renting in Brisbane a couple of years back a much larger percentage of my income was going towards rent in comparison. Energy costs ontop were also insane. Felt impossible to get ahead. 

At the moment in TH I’m paying 6.5c/kw for electricity and 2gbs fibre internet for $30/m. 
Housing is also dirt cheap. I paid 75k for a very decent condo that would easily be 600k in Aus. 

Your spot on about the safety net, but if you are working you shouldn’t need it and can always come back to Australia if things don’t work out. 

Please don’t get me wrong. I love Australia and think it’s an amazing country. My issue is with the management.
Look I'm sure there are lovely blokes around! I just didn't meet any of them. And even the really nice ones I did meet, I just felt that they wanted to cut my wings a bit to stop me flying away and I couldn't deal with that anymore. Dating women has it's fair share of fuckery too but it's less than dating Australian men haha
Technically Melbourne is bigger, but to be honest, I've never met a Melburnian who strives that Melbourne be the biggest capital.

It's actually a source of alarm and embarrassment for us southerners
Yeah but have you lived in Gosford? I went to school there.
Surprise!
3 times the size of your prawns stu…
For as long as there have been French people, they have been three hours and a stale baguette away from staging an uprising. Most of the world, in most countries, fears their government. The French government fears their people. History has taught them that when they don’t, things end poorly. We should all study the French. The philosophers. Their history. They are not perfect, but they’ve been at it a long time and they’re good at it. We couldn’t have won against the British without them.

Oh, et j’ai adoré la cérémonie sur la senne. C’etait tres original.
100% agree 

That was very much the issue for me as well. Australians fast becoming a place where its good to be either very rich, or have nothing. Anything between that is just diminishing returns the harder you push. 

If you’re not interfacing with the system, those niceties of Australia fall away and you’re left with absurd housing costs, high costs of living, stagnant (in some cases declining) wages, high taxes (not that high globally, but not great, particularly if you’ve got HECS) increasingly choked up cities due to population growth etc etc. At that point other countries start to become compelling and you have to ask yourself if the juice is worth the squeeze.
There's also a racial/nationalistic element to teaching English, at least in Korea when I looked into it years ago.

I was once between jobs and looked into teaching English there and was pretty much told outright that because my passport wasn't one of several Western (ie White) countries, I would get denied an English teaching visa. Note that I grew up overseas at international schools and speak perfect English. 

I asked around a bit further than a guy in the industry told me that Koreans would refuse to learn English from 'brown people'.
Doesn't South Korea have a 48hr work week which they are trying to increase to around 70?
Kinda shit, to be honest, especially if you work for a local company. There's less official leave days and you have to get a doctor's certificate for all medical leave, for example.
I'm pretty much exactly the same as you. I was in Korea 2015-2016 and saved about 15k a year. House was paid for and my bills were very, very low. Food was literally about $10 a day (not being frugal either) and I basically did whatever I wanted on weekends.
I don't know about Korea. I should have specified Japan. I imagine it was possible to do that in Japan 10 years ago but wages haven't increased and the yen is worth much less.
Absolutely, the comment above mentioned LA, London, NY. I have no aspirations for Melbourne to become like them.
Yes that’s true. Sydney is effectively perceived as the “main” city of Australia globally. Like New York or maybe Toronto.
Waits for Melbourne to incorporate Tasmania 😂
Melbourne is definitely bigger now
Melbourne did move its boarders though of what was classified not to long ago. If Sydney scooped up Wollongong or the central coast it would inflate bigger
To be fair, I haven't spent any time in Gosford, but I bought at Umina Beach 4 years ago and it's been great. I can walk to the shops, schools, parks or the beach and we're sandwiched between two national parks. It's been an amazing place to raise kids.
Only thing I knew about Gosford was Father Rod Bower's Facebook posts. Fuckin' champion.
It is the same in China. I had an African American colleague who misssed out on good jobs for that exact reason. And he was much more qualified than I was at that stage.
And they wonder why people aren't having babies 😅
go on plz.  ive  been to Singapore on  holiday,  lovely  country.

is  the  money  good for foreign expat workers there?
Yeah Japan and teaching English is low paying. Vietnam, Korea, China are better paid.
JET program yearly salary: 34,000 aud  
average rent in japan: 500-700/aud a month = 7,200 aud\~/year

27,000\~aud/year for utilities and food sounds good to me.
Fair, I'd imagine Umina has gentrified somewhat since I was there last.
