
Billson's premix cans are incredible, but I can't bear to pay the $12-$14 asking price for a can that's only 3.5% when I'm out at a venue. The tax on locally made spirits is hurting both local business and the consumer.
Been to the brewery twice, once before they started making alcohol and once afterwards.

Last time I went, there were unlimited free samples, so I might've contributed to their difficult financial situation.
Fuck, I love their products so much. 

Although some of the flavours of their cordials do make me scratch my head and think who are they making this for? Lamington flavoured cordial, Birthday cake, Banoffee? Is there really a market there?

I admire their creativity when it comes to coming up with new flavours, it would definitely benefit them to cut back on making these super niche cordials.
Voluntary admission seems like the new trend word these days: Booktopia, Rex jets, now Billson’s.
hope they can get through it, love there cordials.
The government really needs to look at the alcohol excise, it’s gone well past a joke.
Coming soon Bilson's Goon Bag and 2 Minute noodle flavours for those of us on a limited budget.
Bugger
Way too expensive, even at pubs. It's a shame.
i just want the sour cola and rainbow sherbet ones hooked to my veins in full strength amounts at reasonable prices, is that so much to ask
Really like their stuff.... but just SO expensive vs everything else.

Is this a case of weird economics where if they lower the cost they might sell more and make more coin in the long run?
Great way to pay 10 cents on the dollar for outstanding tax. Just ask Hawkers.
Don’t drink alcohol, but I really enjoyed the cordial I was gifted once. Unfortunately couldn’t justify buying it myself as they only sell 3 packs online (which iirc price wise wasn’t even a special deal, it was just the cost of 3) or there was very limited flavours/hard to track down in stores.
Yes. I saw a carton of them today in the First Choice. It was marked at $140. A hundred and forty fuckin dollars for a carton of 24 cans that were about 1 standard drink each.

No wonder they going bust.
$50 p/box for non alcoholic beer is criminal too.

Naked life in Woolies have some ok mocktails, still $13.50 for 4x small cans of, essentially soft drink.

We're getting ripped in Au.
I just wish they weren’t SO FULL OF SUGAR like I get it, but sell me one with half the sugar so I can taste the alcohol.
tell me about it. as someone who enjoys craft beer, they REALLY need to change the tax on them. it's KILLING the industry!
whilst i agree there expensive, there not a sit on all night kinder drink... there a, "oh I have to drive" but want one or two drinks that taste nice kinder drink
we went just before closing so they were essentially forcing us to drink their open cans that were otherwise going to be tipped out. I wasn't complaining and we bought a box as well. :D
For sure. They need to cut back on flavours that people would buy *once* out of curiosity and focus on flavours that people will buy over and over again.
I’ve gone through probably 80% of their cordials and can confirm pretty much all the gimmick/weird ones are either vile, or only good with a tiny amount in soda water like a soft drink. Though Raspberry Vinegar is probably the best I’ve ever had. 

Their limited/special spirits are also amazing
Surprisingly - lamington cordial and coffee liqueur make a a drink taste like a cherry ripe! It’s actually amazing!
Me too.  Sucks they are in the situation but at least they are aware of the situation enough to get in help.
Absolutely, tons of independent breweries and distilleries are in the same boat and the government doesn't care because Bundaberg is still churning out rum.
Yep. Excise on these small companies is just another form of tax and a great big one at that too, running a business having to make sure you cover a giant arbitrary overhead just leads to death of more manufacturing in the country.
they were doing great before they expanded into alcohol. I think they should have stuck to cordial.
I wonder if the new flavours every month or so added a lot of cost. Might have just been better to focus on a handful of flavours
This is my issue too. I can't buy the cordials locally, only the alcoholic versions and couldn't justify buying the cordial as a three pack.
I was pretty excited that they had an advent calendar case last year… but for $160 a case, they can fuck off.
they do sell at that price, but you can get them for RRP on their website - which is $120 with free shipping. They do fairly regular sales as well, earlier this year some flavours were 50% off.
They sell.
They are for young people.
Oh I just ordered Raspberry Vinegar so that’s good to know! 

Care to review the chili punch? Is it actually spicy or just peppery?
Wtf? Raspberry vinegar? Ok please explain.
Which isn't locally owned and very broadly *locally operated*
Yeah they really needed smaller sample bottles or something at least. Too much of a gamble for the price and/or quantity otherwise. Thing is if I knew the flavours I loved, I would of been more than happy to buy 3 at a time.
I was looking through my emails to see if I'd ordered the chili one before (I haven't and I think I was conflating it with Spiced Apple) but I did find [this](https://i.imgur.com/E8ubNiR.png) lol.

Bet the first thing they do is cut that right the fuck back
It's surprisingly spicy but delicious, I love it.
its one of the 'classic' cordial flavours like sarsparilla, its sweet, but with a little bite.

blurb here: https://billsons.com.au/products/raspberry-vinegar-cordial
