
My oldest had it a few months ago. She’s still having coughing fits that leave her gasping for breath. 

She was otherwise fine (legit would have never thought whooping cough- no fever, no other symptoms besides the cough) She kept having these coughing fits where she couldn’t breathe and would throw up. Luckily the GP did a viral swab and we caught it early. Everyone in the household started prophylactic antibiotics (after 5 days on antibiotics you’re no longer considered contagious) and only one other sibling ended up catching it, and had virtually no symptoms. Incredibly my 4 month old didn’t catch it. 

Just wanted to mention the antibiotic thing because I wrongly thought it was viral, not bacterial, so had no idea about antibiotics. Most of the people I’ve spoken to didn’t realise either.
It’s ripped through the UK school system.
Goddamn cookers.
Thanks Anti-vaxxers. I was so worried that we were about to wipe out this poor defenceless virus. I look forward to the days Polio comes back as well. How good are antivaxxers.
So, are your other kids now vaccinated ?
That’s so good your 4month old didn’t get it! It’s a terrible illness. Hope your oldest is better now.
Sorry to hear that. 

Australia copped it worse over east and Queensland, initially

https://theconversation.com/whooping-cough-is-surging-in-australia-why-and-how-can-we-protect-ourselves-226918
That and the hypernormalisation of endless reinfection of a virus that degrades the immune system even in fully vaccinated, asymptomatic cases.
what makes you think anti-vaxxers are the reason?
They always have been!
Because they're a popular and easy target on this sub that people like to blame for any public health matter.

Honestly, I think there are more people complaining about cookers than there are actual cookers.

If I was to assign blame, I'd blame the employers who won't give their people time off work to take care of their sick kids or to recuperate themselves if they catch something.

For example, I got sick last month with RSV because a manager at my job forced a sick person to come to work. It then spread like wildfire throughout the entire place and then persisted for weeks because this same manager still did his best to make people on his team come into work sick despite all the obvious harm it was causing. Some of them had kids who caught it off them and I wouldn't be surprised if those kids eventually went to school with it because their parents couldn't let them stay at home because they had to go to work.

It's people like that manager who do a hell of a lot more damage than the cookers.

EDIT: Downvoting doesn't make me wrong.
Hmmm let me see, a virus that can be easily eradicated if a vaccine is taken is making a comeback because people are refusing to get the vaccine/refusing to jab their kid when they are young. The people who do this are antivaxers AKA cookers. 

That miiiight just be the reason people are blaming cookers, because they are the reason.
>a virus that can be easily eradicated if a vaccine is taken is making a comeback because people are refusing to get the vaccine/refusing to jab their kid when they are young.

I'd put this more down to the fact that we're importing hundreds of thousands of people from the third world where they don't trust Western medicine into this country on a regular basis.

People here give cookers far too much credit. I know you may not like to hear this but it's true.
