G'day

Firstly - God bless truck drivers.

Now, I would like to know what are some things I can do to say hello to truckies as I'm cruising on the highway. I regularly drive the Hume Hwy for 2/3 hours at night and its almost all truckies for the whole length.

I notice a lot of you do the blinker flashes, left right left right, after you overtake each other. I've tried this in a car and get mixed results.

See you on the road!


Just give them space and don’t be a muppet around them is the best thing you can do. 

You might think you’re being polite by trying to say hello but a car flashing any lights at them will just make them wonder if you’re trying to alert them to a hazard.
Get a radio if you want to chat with them.

The indicator is just a thank you after the truck being overtaken has let the overtaking truck know that it is clear to move back in front as the vehicles are quite long and it's sometimes difficult to see how much room is available.
Please Please please get a UHF radio .
Make sure you report back all the interesting conversations. 
It will be a wild ride.
I could be wrong but a truck using their left indicator may alert the overtaking truck it is safe to move to the left. I could be wrong. I've also seen trucks flash their lights to let someone know it's safe to move left. That's according to a truck driver I knew 20 years ago.
Everything you need to know is here: [https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076729/](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076729/)

Smokey and the Bandit
>let the overtaking truck know that it is clear to move back in front as the vehicles are quite long and it's sometimes difficult to see how much room is available.

These guys like to get out of the right as quick as they can - so the overtaken truck will give a quick flash as soon as the rear of the overtaker is clear. There's not much room in it

Any weird sequence of indicators or hazards, just after such a manoeuvre is a thanks/no problems
Had a handheld one for driving on the hume/princess highway for a good 10 years.
Basically the regular chatter sums up to "Nyeaaahfukken dog C*unts all over the shop ay" in the most nasally bogan voice you can imagine. That voice has become the default Aussie truck driver voice in my head.. it was.. distinctive and common..

Having the UHF Came in handy a few times when either calling out the knuckle dragger that's about to *attempt* to lug 40+ tonnes of gravel up a steep hill in the right lane, or  (the only real useful bit) when stuck in a traffic jam. they'd report where the accident was, how many lanes were open and if cops/Ambos/fireys were on scene.

 For the most part Waze and google maps have replaced it
