Is the Nine network so hard up for storage that they can only store Australian events on their servers? 

  
The whole idea of the Olympics is celebrating athletes of all nations, but Nine seems to only allow Australian races to be stored on their streaming service. 

  
So, is it just bad sportsmanship or are they too poor to have the storage?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
To add, what’s the point of having multiple digital channels and then showing the same event simultaneously on all of them?
Their coverage isn't about the Olympics but more about making money. They paid a lot of money for their rights to broadcast and that would only include Australia. Similarly other countries are likely only storing and streaming their own countries.

I would imagine it is the International Olympic Committee, or whatever their called, which owns the rights for total coverage. They want to make money out of it too.

I can guarantee international friendships and celebrating athletes was never mentioned during negotiations.
If you find the menu for individual sports you should see all? events under there? At least that's where I found the Men's mountain biking gold medal race.
Nah, that seems to be Aussie coverage in general.
They must be there somewhere, I'm watching the 10m air pistol from yesterday and it was Ind vs Kor. Not an Aussie in sight.


I had started watching it though and it was in a "keep watching" section, couldn't find it from scratch on the app. Possibly they have all the coverage but their selective curation is shit. 
Thats why paying for STAN is a much better idea. That way you can view whatever the heck you want, without any editorial decisions.
The app seems to have everything live, it's not bad. I'm bouncing between a few sports. Worth a go if you can. 
That makes another point. I think that whoever gets the rights to broadcast the Olympics should be required to provide equal airtime to the Paralympics. Why is it that their accomplishments are declared less worthy of acclaim by some suits in an office who never do anything more athletic than walking to the vending machine?
My son wanted to watch the BMX and there was like 4 videos of a total of less than 10 minutes and only Australian riders.
I'm already paying for Stan, fucked if I'm paying another $15pm for sports.
wtf are you talking about? The Paralympics is on in like a month and will be on Nine as well?
I agree completely, the Paralympics should get equal airtime. Sadly these decisions are based on profitability and nothing else. I'd be surprised if any one involved in negotiations know how to spell Paralympics.
That is garbage, they need to do better than that.
then enjoy the ads, why would they offer something that the Rights to telecast would cost them absolute tens of millions to broadcast, for free? Channel 9 at least attempts to make it back through ads.
The thread isn't about ads, nor was my comment, it was about the sports being shown or not shown. I'm already paying for Stan. Should pay extra to watch a new series they release?
