Easy example: heart surgeons who routinely fly once a month to consult with batches of patients in towns where there are no heart surgeons.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
It won't affect me directly, but reduced competition will increase airfares all round...
I fly about 10-12 times a year. I have used Rex exclusively for the last 3 years, found the price point, service and reliability really fantastic. Really sad to hear that it will be no more. 

Will obviously have to move to the other 3 airlines, haven't really enjoyed them.
> Easy example: heart surgeons who routinely fly once a month to consult with batches of patients in towns where there are no heart surgeons.

These surgeons would continue flying Rex. Their capital city jet operations are those which stopped, not regional services. 

Those people who want to fly between Sydney and Melbourne will fly with one of the several other airlines.
It's dissappointing for sure (I'm a huge fan), but they will continue in some form, under a different ownership, servicing the regional routes.
Affects me: It will hit all the specialists who fly into Orange to run those clinics- every specialty you need from psychiatrists to geriatricians to cardiologists. NSW Health has a significant crisis on its hands. 

Side note- the most amazing flight I’ve ever taken in my life was from Sydney to mid north coast. The first officer took my bag to stow away and I entered to plane by climbing the stairs that flopped out from the plane. We flew low on a sunny cloudless day north as if we were following the Pacific Hwy. I could see the building I work in, we flew parallel to the Harbour Bridge. We followed the glorious coast line all the way. The lack of fuss for boarding and disembarkation made it almost door to door transport. 

Rex have the lowest rate of cancellations [source](https://www.bitre.gov.au/statistics/aviation/otp_month) and higher rate of on time arrivals than Virgin and Jetstar. 

We need this airline.
I'm in regional SA. We have Rex and Qantas at the local airport, with Rex every day and Qantas a few times a week. Without Rex then it leaves Qantas to come in and jack up the prices even higher than they already are
Are they still flying regionally? Alot of fifo jobs use them
Guys, the government won’t let the regional side of Rex die off. It’s only the city routes that will go. Which is a crying shame because we needed the competition and their service was incredible. But all this talk about medical services being affected is horseshit. It’s not going to happen. All of the reports today pointed out they own the regional aircraft, the jets are being leased.
If those Doctors have to rely on Qantas their patients are fucked.
Rex’s regional services to small airports will not be allowed to suffer — it’ll be a condition of a Government bailout (cash or other support)

They’ll be forced to give up their 737 routes between capital cities.

Rex will not be allowed to fail.
I'm about to visit Australia for the first time and booked a Rex flight the day before it collapsed. Luck is not on my side.
It will affect me a lot and my friend. I visit someone that lives rural. 

There are no trains out there. Also my friend has to fly out to see a specialist.
There are only two airlines that fly from Burnie to Melbourne … soon - only one. It’ll be cheaper to fly to London than to Burnie from Melbourne …
Rex’s subsidiary PelAir run Victoria’s Air Ambulances. Lots of people rely heavily on them to access specialist medical treatment.
I'll lose my credit
Rex also owns the company that has the contract to operate Ambulance planes in Victoria.
This is a shame. Rex by far had the best service and prices and I always flew with them if I could.
1. It won’t directly affect me as I have never flown regionally

2. The core business will continue running in some shape or form, either as Rex or a subsidiary of Virgin etc.
Hope the regional side pulls through at least. By far the superior flight between it and Qantas for my once a month regional flight in and out of Syd.
Probably not directly as they don’t fly the route I most commonly fly, the death of Bonza was a more direct blow for me personally.
It won't - never flown them unlikely ever will
I drive everywhere. I’ll be right.
Price point must have been too low.
I agree. I  really enjoy flying on these smaller planes. So fuss-free, especially boarding, which is a breeze.
I wish I had your confidence. But yes, I hope too.
They're still flying the Saab 340 planes. Just not the Boeing 737s
If Rex stops its regional flights, look into link. Same planes, and I believe they still land at orange
Hmmm I don’t know that NSW health is just going to stop or even notably reduce specialist visits because an airline stops flying. There is absolutely no need to be hyperbolic, and at worse you could say that the specialist travel will possibly become either more difficult or more expensive. 

And that’s only if the airline totally shutters which I don’t think is what anyone is actually claiming
Qantas has three flights a day Sydney to Orange. It's a shame the competition will be reduced, but specialists will still definitely be able to fly to Orange.
I bloody well hope so!
How is Burnie affected by this?
I have/had a credit,  too.
When two companies control 95% of the marketshare of an industry, any attempt to compete HAS to have a low price point. And even then, it’a impossible to survive in that industry.

The problem isn’t any actions Rex took. The problem is our government allowing and even enabling corporate duopolies, in the airline industry and our grocery stores. 

Our legislators need to bust up the duopolies and offer subsidies and other benefits to any smaller competitors. Not only is this far healthier for our economy, it reduces political corruption and leads to better prices and higher standards of goods & services for consumers.
Who's being hyperbolic? Just asking a bloody question.
It’s one of the few airlines servicing Burnie - Melbourne…. So prices will be v high once it’s gone as .. monopoly.
Rex took a gamble on Virgin failing. It didn't pay off. Australia has never been big enough for three major jet operators. What makes you think Rex would be any different?
What? I wasn’t responding to you…
Rex as a whole hasn’t collapsed. Their jet operations have stopped, which doesn’t affect Burnie. It’s a stretch to assume everything will stop.
Sydney to Melbourne is the most lucrative flight in the world generating US$1.2 BILLION annually. The tenth highest is Perth to Melbourne generating USD$642 MILLION annually.

The reason Rex failed was because of anti competitive behaviours allowed by the government.
Fingers crossed… it’s not looking great tbh.
I couldn't fucking believe that syd-mel was the most lucrative flight in the world but I looked it up and holy shit it is. Even higher than New York to London. nyone have any insight into why this is?
You're insinuating that the other airlines were flying at a loss to drive Rex out of the market? If that's true, why were the other airlines making profits? 

Rex used a government handout given during COVID for the wrong reasons (to expand into jets instead of helping with their existing business). This is where they went wrong. Expanding into a hugely capital exhausting business when they didn't have much capital.
It’s not Quantas flying at a loss, it’s quantas hoarding all the landing slots at Sydney Airport. When you are able to stop your competition from using airports you don’t need to compete on price.
No I’m insinuating Qantas particularly are allowed to be anti competitive because the government allows it.

Bigger airlines can undercut fares or simply increase flights for routes where a startup would start flying from as they can still make profit overall from other routes. This absolutely kills competition and the only losers are Australians as we have no completion and the king airlines can increase profits as they see fit. Which is exactly why the routes above are so lucrative.

Unfortunately for a business trying to grow they need to invest in capital. If you don’t grow you die anyway.
Do you complain about the Middle Eastern government owned airlines undercutting fares on international routes with their subsidised operating costs? Or is that just plain old competition? 

It's fine to hate Qantas, but they're not the reason Rex failed.
Straw man, cool.
