Channel 9’s coverage is terrible. Replays are highlight reels so they can force you to pay for Stan. It’s a bloody outrage I say!
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Nine has bought the rights for the next 4 Olympics bud
ABC definitely does not have Olympics money.
C’mon - I like to hate on Stefanovic too, but are you really not finding the sports/coverage you are looking for? I’m old - but EVERY Olympics coverage before this one was less complete, lower quality, more Australia-centric.
You can get every live event on 9now. I think the coverage is quite comprehensive! UI is not amazing but coverage is good
No, you do not have to use Stan. 9Now app has pretty much all you need for live coverage and then highlights packages available the next day.
Anyone else using BBC iPlayer? Obviously commercial free and the commentary isn't distracting.
You can get the full replays on 9now. You just have to search for the sport
Give it to SBS.

Let them use Eurovision commentators, past and present.  

Myf & Joel on the Swimming.  Julia and Sam on the Athletics.  Graham Norton on the handball.  And the ghost of Terry Wogan on the rest.
I don't want the government paying an inflated price for Olympic coverage.  I am more than happy for people who want to watch the Olympics to pay for it or watch ads.

With Channel 9 just don't bother watching the main channel so you don't have to cross to the studio.  Watch the seperate sporting channels.  Loved the coverage of the surfing - they had great commentary.

This Channel 9 coverage is a hell of a lot better than Olympics before cable and streaming.  You don't seem to remember when Olympics was only shown on one channel with ads and studio crosses and interviews with athletes and athlete background packages all thrown in.

The worst was when I had to watch an Olympics from America.  Jesus tap dancing Christ that was horrible.  So much packaging and time fillers and so little actual sport.
Petition won’t mean shit, the rights go to the highest bidder lol
Why are people complaining about  9 now app. I've found it great
watch on 9now, the coverage is fine and they have full replays on it. Also 9 has rights for the next couple of olympics
Rupert Murdoch will force-choke you before he lets ABC cover the Olympics
The 9Now is pretty good. No ads, just whatever sport you wish to watch with good, unbiased commentary.
I used 9now app. Not perfect but at least you can go to Day X search for the sport and select what is event to get full replay. Currently replaying Womens Final Artistic Gymnastic for 2+ hours!
Get a vpn and watch bbc
Imagine the outcry from Sky News if that happened.


Seriously though, the coverage on Stan is really good and you don't get the awful 9 commentary.
Is iView 1080p yet? lol
Nine have proven they are news readers not sports commentators. 

Thorp in the swimming has been great with Thommo. 
Get the ‘chemistry’ is so forced and they just look like they don’t want to be there because they aren’t sports people. 

They put Dylan with that women and they have zero chemistry.
Meh they will just end up giving it to Fran Kelly and Patricia Karvelas to host.
And have everyone whinge that we’ve wasted taxpayer money on it?
Why? 

If you aren’t already you will 100% be watching it  online next time.  TV is  irrelevant.
I don’t watch sport that much but the inclusion of so many ads is laughable at this point. 

“Steve from Chanel 9 Wide World of Sports here, we’re here at the Suncorp Stadium for the 2024 Ampol State of Origin. We’ve just seen the Harvey Norman replay of that tackle in question. Bring up Isuzu D-Max player profile for that player. We can see this is his 3rd Origin and Sportsbet have given him great odds for first goal of the match (gamble responsibly). Over to you John at the Telstra box.”
I would love this just so I don’t have to see the ad with the Alex Lloyd song or the one with the tones & I song every f*%ing 5 minutes
Where is the money coming from?

A petition is not going to mean a thing, if ABC buys the rights that has to all come from tax payers!!!!! People already whine enough about the ABC budgets. Hilariously are already complaining about having to pay STAN a small amount to get great coverage. 

Honestly I wasnt forced to pay STAN but I am glad I did.
Its amazing that with taxpayer money backing the team Australia, private companies are still allowed to charge us for the right to watch.
The commentating is appalling.
So tax payers should be stumping up the $300 million + production costs?
9's coverage is shitting all over 7's Tokyo coverage. And the 9now app is a breeze what the hell you talking about 
I don't mind the free coverage, just get Karl and Eddie McGuire off the screen. Also, why the heck is Mark Taylor commentating diving. 

What should also be sanctioned is that regardless of who has the rights, Bruce McAveney commentates the track and field.
Please, no. As bad as the Channel 9 FTA coverage is, we need the contract to be awarded to a commercial station that has the budget to license all the streaming content from the IOC.

An ABC Olympics would just be one or two channels, and if you wanted to watch, say, Archery when they were showing Swimming and Rowing, then you would be screwed.
I can almost deal with their coverage if their app wasn't so overwhelmingly shithouse.
Sport should be free for everyone.
ABC can't even do decent coverage of the NYE fireworks, I don't think anyone needs 2 weeks+ of that train wreck.
Hard to watch events that have past. Hard to find things not featuring Australia. 9Now is rubbish.
They (either 9 or whoever broadcasts the Olympics) has been using stock audio for the Triathlon and it's been tilting me. The same crowd cheer in a loop for over an hour.
No thanks.
Sadly Nine’s current contract runs until the end of Brisbane 2032. ABC would not have the capability to outbid what Nine offered for the IOC.

You can watch live coverage and highlights on 9Now, but if you want to watch something that does not specifically have an Australian athlete or team participating in it, you’ll likely have to subscribe to Stan.
What it on 9now with an ad blocker. It's literally identical to paying for stan to watch it.

You get all the streams of all events (not sure how replays works tho)
my main complaint about the Channel 9 coverage is they don't have a live bug, so I never know if I'm watching something live.
BBC iPlayer on a VPN is fantastic. No idea why you can't just buy a subscription directly, probably because it's OP TV.
How about a  petition to cancel the whole corrupt shebang altogether? Just do sports without the scummy IOC if they are that important to everyone.
Please no, the news channel is almost entirely Olympics as it is
Yeah im bummed that, for example football, If you don't watch that day for non-Aus teams,  the replay is gone the next. I'm guessing Stan you can watch all?
Miss the days the ABC re-enacted the Olympics via the awesome style of Lego. Do it in real time play style again and this is some Olympics events I’ll enjoy watching. 😂😂
Hahahahahahahaha. The only thing more corrupt and money than Olympics is FIFA.
You need Prime Minister Andy for this.
Good thing we'll have a solar eclipse to keep us occupied
Can we at least organise a leaderboard while competitions are going.
BBC and nbc coverage has been great 
ngl the Ch7 app/website last time around was fire. Website OK with 9now, app is a fuckin steaming pile.
I paid $15 for the month for the full Stan coverage and I'm really happy with it. The Stan coverage is very thorough with good commentators and at less than the cost of most meals now. I'm just going to delete Stan Sport the second it's over.
Use the App it is so much better and there are no ads ... yet
Get Stan for one month. It’s so much better
You got 350M$ Dollarydoos (min) cause that's what you're going to need.
I'd prefer the ABC spends it's budget on just news and other topics. I'm just a single Australian I know, but I'm not interested in sports at all. There are plenty of other sources for the Olympics.
9now app is pretty good. Doesn't have many ads so far. 
There’s full replays of almost everything for every sport on 9now so what are you on about
No. Keep it on 9, use the ABC to produce quality TV shows such as "The Late Show" and "Mad As Hell"
Commentators are pretty shot all round. moving it to ABC would get rid of all the ego and may bring in some knowledge.
I get 17 free channels from the IOC. Our cable provider is making them free to the whole country. I'm watching the rowing final now.
It can always be worse. Putting it on the ABC would be proof of that.
In general I think the subscription streaming model is pretty annoying but $26 to watch the entire Olympics is not too bad of a deal. It could cost that much to go out and see one movie.
9now? Lots of variety to choose from there.
I’m glad I give zero fucks about the Olympics
I for one don’t want the ABC using my tax money to pay hundreds of millions of dollars for the rights to an event I’m not interested in. The Olympics will look very different before too long. Countries can no longer afford to host such an expensive event. Both monetarily and socially.
Why?
Have you ever seen ABC cover sport? It’s fucking terrible. They have no idea what they are doing.

SBS has a great sport team even though it’s been cut to nothing now.
Have you ever watched a live event covered by the ABC? Or even just their 24 news channel. It’s absolute trash quality.
The nine commentators cant banter with their Olympian co-commentators. Do they harbour resentment or are they just ignorant of the specialist insight - it’s so awkward. I don’t recall channel  7 reporters having this issue.
No no no. I want a station with minimum sport. I don't  want the ABC doing the Olympics. I bought a digital radio that avoid too much sport
Please NO, too expensive.
ABC doesn't have the budget to pay for it.
Nein Entertainment will not allow ABC 1 second of coverage outside news programs.
No thanks.

The Olympics^TM is a cesspool of corruption and I'd rather not pour more public money into it.
Anyone who doesn’t hate themselves is already watching the BBC or CBC coverage.

You would have to be a drongo to put up with the contempt that 7/9/10 have for their viewers. They think their viewers are morons and openly treat them that way.
The IOC is a method of sucking loads of money from many countries by charging millions and handing out exclusive rights to very little coverage.

Just one of the many reasons why I'm boycotting the Olympics this time around.

*Channel 9’s coverage is terrible.* And that's another reason. Why waste your time watching stuff that isn't really what you want to see? "But hey, I'll watch the tiddly-winks event, because the Womens' Beach Volley Ball event isn't being shown."
The Olympics don't matter anymore. We know the results from every competition leading up to it. Instantly.
so long watching volleyball on seven plus :(
Who do I complain to about these two twits commentating the BMX final!?

Huge! Oh my god! Wow! 
9Now is great, easy to use, and really highlights the Aussies. Take it from a Brit where our coverage is worse than this.
Please don’t. We don’t need this rubbish on the ABC. 
Yeah nah, don't need a welcome to country every time there's a camera angle change.
Watch on 9Now for a much broader coverage
16 more years of Karl?
It's cute Nine thinks they'll even exist in 16 years time
Including or excluding Winter Olympics?
>ABC definitely does not have Olympics money.

Even if they did would we really want them to waste it on something where most people don't watch more than 1 or 2 sports.
Especially when they can’t milk it for ad revenue haha
I wouldn’t want the ABC to waste their budget on the Olympics, but they definitely get a bigger budget!
Broadcast TV network money comes from advertising, which is moving online as their audience dies.

I suspect at some point soon the ABC will have more money, and the gap will widen.
Well it is on ABC radio. So they do cover it. Audio only though I guess. But they talk about the event in more depth and detail.
Seriously. 9Now if you're really tight for cash, otherwise Stan for the month for amazing coverage - the best we've ever had.

Is OP whinging about... free to air? In *2024?*
Yeh OP doesn't seem too knowledgeable on this
Exactly, 9now is honestly amazing. You get full coverage of every live event, no crossing to other things and very few ads. Generally you get British or American commentary but often that’s better and gives you background on all the athletes rather than focusing on the Aussies.
Because this coverage is just OBS streams that were available under 7s coverage (and I hate to say it, but that UI was better).

I spent two days trying to find the live streams
It's not every event - Sailing has one livestream at the moment. It's showing an aerial view of the ocean/coast while they wait for the Mens Skiff race to start (which doesn't have any Aussies in it). Meanwhile the Mens Dinghy race 2 is on which has Matt Wearn (Aussie) currently coming third. Super frustrating!!
Yeah I’ve been watching what I want and don’t watch the live feed on the main channel. It’s fantastic.
If you want to rewatch entire races without Australian participation then yes
Yeah 9now is actually great as long as you're only interested in Aussie results. For example rugby 7s on demand you could watch full games when Australia was playing but only highlight reels of other games. Still pretty good for free.
Sadly not awake at 2am for the live coverage
As an Aussie, with a VPN, BBC Iplayer is a Godsend (and no TV license needed, I just use a Post Code of one of you poor people) :)
Good tip!
It's outstanding in comparison
5 euro/month for dedicated UK IP Address running VPN on smart TV with iPlayer on browser. I get the Olympics and the kids love CBeebies.
[removed]
Not those without Australian participation
I remember sbs had the rights in 2004 and 2008. They had everything channel 7 didn't want
Lee Lin Chin needs to be in on this.
Right now Mark Tubby Taylor is calling synchronised diving, so anything's possible!
Amazing
Yeah the main channel is garbage but why would you watch that?

When we get to choose what sport we watch , and can watch every single sport it’s amazing. 

Last Olympics I got to watch every softball game in full. When softball was last in the Olympics in 2008 I’d be lucky to see the entire Aussie game. Anyone else? No chance.
Because they’re watching the ‘main’ coverage and not realising they can choose what they want to watch.
Because people just love complaining about fucken everything
The ABC have the Radio Broadcast rights for Australia and have comprehensive coverage.
Depends on the sport. I watched the bmx last night and the commentators were excited and involved and actually commentating. 
Switched over to the hockey and it was two boring ass people softly talking about past games and not even commentating what’s happening on screen.
It's a sports event. Were you expecting something more than head in arse commentators?
Be a lot more useful and sensible that some of the hundreds of millions that have been wasted many times over on the last few years by the government. But yea, realistically never going to happen.
I’m for it.
I thought 7 did much better. Of course the time zone helped.
Sure, if you don’t have ears.
With Ray Warren and Darrell Eastlake doing the swimming, even if it is just AI.
The feeds come from the Olympic Broadcasting Centre, so it’d be them
That’s $15 on top of the minimum $12 Stan subscription fee
You will when you realise the Olympics will price you out of your retirement plan to live in Brisbane.
TV yes. Their online coverage though is top tier.
the IOC should be paying the city to host the Olympics and then check how out of pocket they are when the broadcast rights and ticket sales don't cover it.
Why would there be a welcome to country? Especially if it’s not in Australia…?

Plus you probably only really mean an acknowledgement of country. A welcome is completely different lol.
Blokes ticker can't handle another 16 years of booze n blow
Pay for Stan and you get no ads and no fuckwits.
Lord give me strength.
Until Brisbane 2032.
pretty much this, the Olympics is designed to be commercially friendly, the real thing should be making sure SBS keeps the world cup, as soccer is made for something like SBS that can only have 5 minutes of ads per hour.
Exactly. They'd be paying tens of millions for licensing and then production costs Just so a lot of people can watch some swimming and the women's soccer while just about nobody watches the other sports. It'd be a terrible use of their resources.

Edit: my fucking spelling 🤦‍♂️
Enough time to complain on reddit but not enough time to actually open the 9Now app.
Generally the commentators on those feeds are the ones that cover the sport all season long.
Two days finding live streams? Give you an example this morning i went from watching the USA dream team’s live game to the swimming and then back to the basketball and if i want to watch sailing or gymnastics it’s available. Of course if you’re on 9now after say 9am there’s not much on as competition would be done for the day
There’s a categories section on 9now that has every event doesn’t it? I have found everything I’ve looked for and we are watching all the odder sports like skateboarding.
9app covers 95% of what Australians are going to watch.

You want to watch a niche event? Sounds like you're a real sports fan, the Stan sub is more than worth it for your interest.
Im confused just go on youtube and search for the highlights you're looking for then?
I use a VPN to get out of paying my TV licence ;) (I’m an Aussie in the UK, and use my office’s postcode for my iPlayer account)

Nah seriously though, the BBC > ABC mainly because it has more funding by way of the TV licence.
I thought the BBC didn't have the rights to the full Olympics? It all went to Discovery+
the concept of tv license is such an absurd thing
Your [comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/1egj5qh/starting_a_petition_for_the_abc_to_cover_the_next/lfsvx5u/?context=3) in /r/australia was automatically removed because you used a URL shortener or content cache.

These are not permitted in /r/australia as they impair our ability to enforce link blacklists.

Please re-post your comment using direct, full-length URL's only.


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
There are definitely full replays of heaps of sports without Aussies, it’s just a terrible UI to find them
I watched the usa vs Serbia basketball and plenty of the surfing heats that weren't Australians.
And everyone fell in love with table tennis, weightlifting and all the other sports they showed.
european handball participation numbers boomed in 2004 because it was on SBS in primetime. It was glorious! Unfortunately the clubs couldn't handle the influx.
Absolutely.
Thought a former soccer player and commentator would have been better considering they have bettter knowledge at diving
Look…Tubs was captain the last time I really paid attention to cricket.  So I guess I have some nostalgia there.

But I know enough to know that he made a rubbish cricket commentator after that.  I can only imagine how much worse he’s doing outside of his own lane.
Very confusing because this event had already ended by the time it was on the main tv channel feed. I watched it thru the app and it had 2 experienced commentators that actually knew what they were talking about. Flick to tv feed and it’s Tubs who’s hardly an expert.
Because finding that is hidden behind garbage UI
Limited full replays for those of us who aren't watching live. 
Not in Brisbane, Sydney Melbourne or Perth they don’t. They also aren’t allowed to stream it.
The BMX guys had enthusiasm but it was embarrassing that they hadn’t learned how to pronounce competitor names (fairly standard expectation for commentators) and they didn’t provide much background on the competitors either. Needed more training I suspect.
It’s a one in 4 year major sports event. I expect a level of professionalism and preparation.
The 7 app was much easier to use and find live streams with. And I hate to praise channel 7 for anything
Yes it sure is. But I always pay for Stan anyway, so for me that's no different and it's just $15 extra.

But yes if someone didn't already have Stan they would have to pay both fees.
Go on……
[removed]
they’ve conned the poor bastard into an ai likeness contract by now for sure
Let me tell you the tale about a man named Keith Richards.......
The point of this post is we shouldn't have to pay
Iunno if I'm missing something. I'm watching online and no issues with ads, dedicated channels for most sports... but I have ad block so that might be making life easier.

Only complaint is it having to rebuffed when switching in and out of full screen
100% agree.

Want quality - pay for quality.
Such is the life of your average redditor 😄
In the app, the section with the olympic rings only has replays. I could find the live channel stream, where they mostly show replays until an aussie is doing something, but it's not obvious how to get to the rest of it.

I have now found it because someone told me where it was after I complained. The UI is bad.
I think it depends on the sport. Certain sports they have the full replay even when Australians were not participating in that session (for example, I watched the whole mens gymnastics session) but other sports they only have a highlights package so you can’t see the full replay. 

But they do seem to have something for every sport even those which Australia have no athletes for (handball and fencing according to Wikipedia).

I’ve been really happy with the coverage honestly
For rowing it mainly has the races with Australian crews (atleast heats and repechages). It seems like they changed that for semis and finals, I still would have liked to watch the early races aswell.
I haven’t been able to find a single replay that’s equivalent to the 4K “mini replays” of Stan. It’s the same argument of Steam and OG Netflix. 

For $35 a month, I can get 4K coverage of all the grand slams, F1 and olympics coverage, but I can watch the mini replays in 4K that give me all the info I want exactly when I want it or I can watch it live.

I only signed on to Stan for Wimbledon, in the same month I get Olympics for basically free. Once the Olympics is over, I’ll probably cancel it until the next grand slam. 

The convenience of not needing to trawl through YouTube to find a competent summary of Wimbledon matches without the takedown bullshit is just not worth the effort in my eyes, but then again, I do love my tennis.

It sucks that kayo/stan/netflix/disney/paramount/hulu/google1/applePlus etc etc all now as expensive as foxtel premium was 2 decades ago with cable internet, but I guess piracy is always a solution if the supply is too hard to find.
Also they're rolling in that Bluey cash because we're idiots
I remember when Australia had a Radio and TV license. $20 in the 60s was a fair bit of money. They had inspectors who would visit houses with TV antennas and ask to see the licence. We had two or three knock over the years, so they took it seriously.

There was a good commercial with [Frank Thring.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5d3nV8qALgA)
They have a limited selection of replays. I searched for fencing, and despite there being dozens of matches, they only have full replays of 4 individual and 2 team medal bouts. It may just be that there is a delay in the editors chopping up all the footage.
LoL.... feels like it was always the case with old SBS, they'd get something before it has popular, build it up then loose it when it starts making real money
It's not great. I reckon Myf & Joel would at least be entertaining.
What replay are you trying to find that you can't?
I didn't know that.

That sucks.

So it's just Adelaide Darwin and regional?
they had one of the bmx commentators on the radio this morning and he was an x-games competitor that was brought in for his knowledge not his commentating skills.
Same. I despise a lot of their management and programs but I found they gave the Olympics a better sense of occasion than 9 have.
Karl isn’t even in the same league as that immoral.
You don’t have to pay, but then you do have to Karl. $15 to avoid Woolworths ads will save you from impulse shopping anyway!
I'm not a big fan of stan for everything else, but the menu for the Olympics is pretty bang on.  Absolutely Worth it for the free month if you qualify.
Try telling that to John Coates and the IOC. 


I have no problem with free to air mandates for most major sporting events... even if they only really end up functionally enriching the TV station owning plutocracy at the expense of sporting bodies. 


The AFL is never going to turn the Grand Final into Pay per view. There's too much money to be made selling Toyota's. 


But the entire Olympics? Come on. If you desperately want to watch the Women's Freestyle 15m Air Pistol Slalom Group N heats... pay your $20 or just go for a freebie offer with a low limit credit card. 
So everyone will have to pay if the ABC televises this shit.
Use 9now and watch ads then.
And whose money would be used to pay for the ABC to obtain the broadcast rights?
Exactly.  I'm not sure what all the complaining is.  9now works a treat with ad blocker.  Hell, wouldn't even bother me that much if I had to watch a few ads every so often, but ad blocker hasn't had any issues.
I was able to watch handball and others live so assumed they would be available later for replay. Have been enjoying the coverage but at times the ad break seem a bit long
They do the same TV antenna inspection stuff here, there are specialist vans to scan for receivers etc. There was even a movie (based on a true story) a few years ago starring Jim Broadbent and Helen Mirren about a Newcastle (upon Tyne, not NSW) man who stole a Francisco Goya painting from the National Gallery in London to draw national attention to his pet political cause, that senior citizen retirees were also liable for the TV licence.

When did they get rid of it in Australia? It was certainly gone by 1999 when we moved there.
yeah, this was my experience last olympics and has been this one too. They prioritise replays of australian events - fair enough - but the other events seem to only get uploaded sporadically. The rough time zone this time around hasn't helped either, as watching live isn't an option for lots of things.
they only have highlights of most things and haven't uploaded full replays yet. They are prioritising events with Aussies in them, but finding niche sports without aussies - handball, fencing, even rugby 7s games often only have highlights up.
I don't know....let's say most of the group stage football games? 


Recaps galore. Full match, not so much.
Ok but you need to step up if placed in that position - or be paired with a good commentator. This is on 9.
Weird, I've watched every night on 9now and haven't had Karl at all.  Didn't cost me anything and my ad blocker stops all the ads.  Why are people paying for Stan?
...or put it on the national broadcaster without ads lol. That's the point of the OP
Australia's, obviously. Seeing as the country goes mad for the Olympics and sends over heaps of them - it would make sense. 


I'm not saying that this is necessarily a good idea. Just pointing out that if they went for this option, it would be a fair call for a national broadcaster, same as the BBC etc who are doing the same thing elsewhere.
Abolished by the Whitlam government, [in 1974.](https://www.nfsa.gov.au/latest/radio-and-tv-licences)
Tough luck if you can't stay up all night to watch them live I guess. Same with past olympics, I wish they'd just upload everything to youtube.
To be clear I wasn't doubting the commenter, just interested.

I'm going to assume it's limited as part of the rights agreement. I won't rule out incompetence though.
I did notice that, I was more than happy with them naming the tricks and then even explaining how it's done during the breaks, was really interesting and 1000% better than the two morons doing the hockey.
4K, 5.1, guaranteed no Karl, watch any event, works on smart TV (where ad blockers are hard). Dirt cheap, not sure how it is viable unless it was part of the Nine rights deal.
So.. tax payers have to foot the entire bill so 1% of people can sit up at 3am to watch sports nobody cares about?
It costs millions of dollars. Even if it's on free to air you are paying for it by watching ads. You do understand money right?
But then we're paying with taxpayers money? We already do give a decent amount for the sports institute, I think that's enough. 

It's not like it's not free to watch now. So there's no need to do that just because of ads. The national broadcaster should take on stuff that commercial channels don't want to do because it upsets their money maker like Gruen or The Checkout if we're gonna go by entertainment.
I think you have missed what I am saying. 

If OP’s point is “we shouldn’t have to pay” then that is not achieved the ABC acquiring the broadcasting rights. It is a publicly funded broadcaster which means the $300m+ that it costs to secure the rights (plus the production costs) would need to come straight from taxpayer funds. That is the very definition of us (the taxpayer) having to pay.
I assume based on your earlier comment about the 60s that you remember the Whitlam era very well. What was it like? From the perspective of a 30 year-old like me, it seems like a volatile but interesting time with a radical, forward-thinking government that brought about a lot of change in a short period of time, but was quite divisive and ended in our most infamous political moment on 11/11/75. History remembers it kindly, I think - though as a leftie I would say that - but what did people think at the time?
yeah, its really annoying, although i can catch the morning sessions of things after the kids are in bed.
i think its limited by resources (which you could call incompetence) given that most things seem to get uploaded eventually.
It's not 4K fyi.  They'll tell you it is, but it's not.  Same with Netflix.

There's no Karl on 9now either.  Stan is exactly the same service so not sure why you think that would be any different.  It's literally only if you intentionally pick the channel 9 stream that you would get him.

You can get 9now on your TV easily, even without Ads.

More importantly, why are you bent out of shape that I'm telling you that you can get the exact same thing for free?  Are you upset that you're paying for something that isn't necessary?  No?  Then why do you care?
I was 15 when he was elected in 1972. Like any teenager, I wasn't really into politics, but there was an exciting vibe that everyone picked up. Libs were in power from 1949-1972, and Australia was very conservative. Until 1966, if a female federal government worker got pregnant, she had to resign. Woman weren't allowed in public bars until 1970, and my girlfriend was not allowed in an RSL games room in 1978! Aborigines couldn't vote until 1962 (a little inaccurate but essentially true), and weren't counted in the census until 1967. There was a lot of social changes in the late 60s - the pill, big demonstrations against the Vietnam War, and "All the way with LBJ". Gough stopped conscription, which was done by lottery, and introduced Medicare. Then we got a second big wave of immigrants, refugees from South Vietnam. Amongst all this, Gough was THE symbol of change. The ["It's Time"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v4eP6DxvcTk) ad really hit the zeitgeist.
I can't find a single full replay of a football match that isn't the Matildas, and that started before the opening ceremony. I am looking on android app, maybe browser is different
Full replays may be pushed over into Stan instead. There are very few sessions with full replays on 9Now, even now that one week has passed since the first events.
I’m definitely not bent out of shape. But I am very happy with the $15 to avoid ads… cheaper than a crappy takeaway lunch.

I’ll have to look into the 4K status. I doubt they’d waste bandwidth on upscaling HD to stream in 4K.

9Now is noticeably worse and not in 5.1 whenever I’ve checked (which has been limited given how good Stan is).
