The woman's bmx natalya did literally the only successful front flip and the American while was clean show no difficulty in tricks don't know how she scored so high?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Yeah didn’t really add up for me either, must be heavily weighted on style and use of the park rather than technical tricks
She was also one of the least technical in the heats and received huge scores. Couldn’t believe the other riders she beat.
I know absolutely nothing about either sport but I had the same thought in skateboarding that Olympic scoring must be different to X games scoring as there seems to be much less risk taken with high difficulty tricks vs avoiding errors. (Everything still seems extremely difficult obviously!) Have been loving BMX.
This is the problem with the sports that are based on style and skill not outright first, second, third. I love watching them, was stoked when they announced skateboarding all those years ago, but when there’s a personal preference or maybe hidden bias you’ll never really have a clear winner
USA score made absolutely no sense
I thought the same thing, only landed front flip, landed a back flip as well, the scoring is whack, totally bizarre.
It seemed to me she did a couple of fancy things then just...nothing, kinda up and down shit. 50 seconds of boring. I think she got about right.
I think the Men's BMX had a similar outcome - the judges were generous in rewarding height, smooth precise landings and transitions more so than the tricks the crowd was appreciating.
I don’t know if she should have been higher than 2nd or first especially

But she should’ve score higher in than her first dig

I think she kind of ran out of big tricks in the second half of her routine. The girl who came first seemed like she was still doing interesting things late while the aussie just petered out. But thats just my armchair analysis I know nothing about the sport
100% robbed. That silver medal run was tame as fuck and just looked safe.
The Chinese women is where the podium level should be at. You can’t just throw one big trick and then just do airs, filler tricks and repeats and expect to podium.
Absolutely robbed, I thought she was going over 90 on that second run
The judges on BBC pointed out that she didn't do a certain trick or two, seemed to me like that was why
Definitely robbed.
Apparently it was all down to ‘style’ . TBF Natalya was lucky to be scored so high, her routine lacked imagination.

She got lucky with one of the Chinese women washing out and Roberts being off her game.
Front flip was wicked. I wouldn't say robbed, it was still a podium result. But yeah it's hard to say without more clarity on how the scoring is done exactly. It would be interesting to have the various runs broken down and the finer details of the scoring explained to understand how they are calculated. 

I was also surprised by the end result in the mens freestyle, from my uneducated perspective, I thought the guy that ended up with bronze in the end had a slightly better run than the guy that ended up with the silver.
Anyone have a link to videos of the runs?
Yeap, we had the same thoughts while watching with some friends. Similar to the second girl from China. Yes, she did fall, but the tricks executed seemed difficult compared to the american who seemed to just bike around.

The same thing happened during ice skating. There were competitors who executed very difficult moves, but the simpler, cleaner person won. I think difficult moves should score higher even if not clean/person falls, but I am not a judge so that’s just my opinion. lol
I think they should do cumulative score, so when they put a foot down they don't just roll off the skate park, they get back and do some more tricks. I don't think she was robbed, she did the one flip at the start and then just rode around the park not doing much of anything. I'd say if anything she was lucky to keep the 3rd place
Scammed indeed
It's almost as though judged sports shouldn't be a thing at the Olympics. Give me sports that are determined purely by time/distance/weight/etc.
Yo, Natalya just did an interview with Eddie and mentioned a cover of the men at work song 'down under' 

Does anyone have a link for the song she was on about?
I somewhat agree, but still, there is no way that run is a 90
X Games whilst they have a system is allowed to just throw it out if something is just 'sick'.


 I think Olympics is extremely rigid on the categories and the scoring going through a rubric.
Yeah I don’t understand how Yuto skated objectively better than Huston and the other US kid.
How it different that diving or gymnastics?
True, but snowboarding doesn't seem to have this problem in the winter Olympics
Yep, it’s a combination of tricks, air time and flow.
I’ve never seen so many fucking x-ups in my life, the Gold medalist should literally be the standard
I watched her 2 runs in the semis and holy crap what a snooze fest, How is this olympic standard?? The average 14 year old at any skatepark in aus has been doing that stuff for yearss
Curious as to why it should have been over 90?
Agreed, it was mentioned that there were some partial incompletions.

In comparison with the others who added things beyond what was intended.

But yeah, I’d much prefer to watch the one who pulls off a couple of massive tricks, rather than a long run of clean blandness.

At least the Chinese rider who won gold had a very solid run, so you couldn’t argue that Australia were cheated of gold.
BMX banditry!
Exactly, the other Chinese should have scored higher even though she stacked her first run. The level of the Chinese to the rest of the pack is night and day.
Yeah we didn't think the Argentinian performance was as impressive as the French dude or the Pom.
Nah, the snowboarding isn't bad in the winter
Was it the Down Under - Luude, Remix that’s popular ?
It's not. There's frequent controversy about the subjective nature of scoring in both those sports too.
oh not one that you've noticed? IMO it's almost always rearing it's ugly head in the judged sports.
True, and one handers haha.
Gymnastics and diving have a 100 years of legacy to help make objective frames of reference around subjective decisions. Skateboarding and bmx will eventually get there too.
Still opinion though, and makes it far more corruptible
It’s the nature of the sport
I mean it is the IOC, corruption is the life blood of the games
It’s the vibe
