Here is the situation. I am writing a ESL course for Vietnamese students who plan to work in Australia as meat Packers. I would like to get some firsthand advice and information about the job.

Few things, what is the work environment like, any advice for newbies, any specific language or technical terms, and any big problems?

I appreciate any assistance. Thanks.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Advice: Don't.

I did it for 6 months, at EC Throsbys in the Hunter Valley. In 6 months there I avoided death or serious injury 4 times. 2 were pissed off bulls in a confined space, one was an altercation with a colleague armed with a knife and the last was some idiot turning on the tilt table and tilting it while I was behind it- they had no concept of isolations or lockouts.

I saw another colleague break 3 ribs and crack her sternum in an incident with a cow, to then be denied hospital treatment and was told that if she missed any time off work she'd lose her job. Another colleague was knocked unconscious by a prank- he had a hock (think the ankle down to the hoof of cattle) dropped onto his head from a 4m height. Bump cap saved it from splitting his head open, but again, no first aid was rendered.

They seemed to seek to hire only the most desperate of employees. The chronically unemployed, the uneducated, those with emotional regulation issues. People who are generally unemployable and thus don't know what their rights are nor how to enforce them when they're abused. 

The place I worked at was an absolute cesspit of toxic masculinity, stupidity and employers taking complete advantage of workers. Any Vietnamese people coming into this environment will be faced with these same issues plus an extra serving of racism + language difficulties.

So my advice is, don't.
Workers brought in on visas are often subjected to workplace safety violations and employment conditions.  I would be including info / terms relating to workplace health and safety and workers rights. Info -  [https://www.smithslawyers.com.au/post/work-safety-guide-meat-processing](https://www.smithslawyers.com.au/post/work-safety-guide-meat-processing) . Also see what might be available through Safe work australia (each state has it's own site).  Also see [https://immi.homeaffairs.gov.au/visas/working-in-australia/work-rights-and-exploitation](https://immi.homeaffairs.gov.au/visas/working-in-australia/work-rights-and-exploitation)
Write instructions on how to contact the Fair Work Ombudsman and WorkSafe when the inevitable happens.
Thanks for the advice. I agree. I was sure this would be the case. However, the students need the money. This work is an easy way to get a visa. A sad start, but the best they can get. I will warn them as best as I can.
> They seemed to seek to hire only the most desperate of employees. 

My mate used to work in HR at a large abattoir. They'd get a lot of blokes who'd been released from correctional centres. Mostly good blokes looking for a fresh start but every now and then they'd have some guy snap on the boning floor.
I worked in meat packing, and then on a killfloor and they were about the hardest jobs I've had. It was 10hr days, we had to smoke inside during our 2, 20 minute breaks for the day (going outside takes too long to take off your clothes, and put them back on etc.), and it's a job you can't really make mistakes in.

You're working on a line, so if you don't do your job fast enough, the whole line slows down, and everyone has to stay longer than normal because the new guy is taking longer, or God forbid, there is "dropped meat" (someone dropped a carcass and it can't be put back on the line, it's a loss for the company). 

I found people with limited English and no skills worked beneath the hole we swept the offal into that goes off to rendering plants to make dogfood and makeup. Having experience and knife skills helps, if you're good, they will get you on the knives.

All in all, the job isn't for everyone, but some people are suited to it more than others. There are easier ways to make a buck like unloading containers in warehouses or things like that.
I don't know of any former prisoners at the one I worked at, but it wouldn't surprise me in the slightest. 

I worked a dog watch cleaning shift, so I only knew about 20 people with any familiarity.
Thanks. I will have a lesson with my students where I tell them all this. They are in a situation where the money is too good to pass on, but at least I can give them warnings and advice.
