
It's normally like this , then track and field is where we take a nose dive
out of date already for anyone thats waking up, we're 4th now
Go the Green & Gold 🇦🇺👍❤️
I see USA are still 1st.... 🤔
That's not bad for a pool of 25 million vs a pool of 1.7 billion....
Aussie, Aussie, Aussie!
Americans living rent free in your head 

imagine losing to America in Rugby for a bronze
America be like 28 is the most we’re number 1!!
8
I’m kinda loving the olympics being in hospital and all but I’ve just cringed yet again at listening to our national anthem.  I think the tune is boring as all hell and words are ghastly. Am I alone in hating this song with a passion?
Glad to see you posted the actual table and not the cope table used on r/Olympics
Big choke on the women’s 100m freestyle…
Need to put usa up top cause they have the most  participation medals
USA first /s
*Sips Tea* ahhh American currently in 4th... delightful 🙂
We really benefit from the swimming being very early in the games.
Actually Olyslagers and Starc usually land on their back.
Already ?! :(
The USA are starting to count participation certificates as medals too.
They would go well in The Ashes with how many moral sortings they do to justify being on top of the table
No they're 2nd
Hahah
The amount of cope it takes to start talking about per capita performance in a competition is hilarious. If Americans started talking shit on India and China if they lost against those respective countries “but per capita” , everyone would be on the same sub Reddit calling them idiots.
Oi Oi Oi
Haha yeah, shaame Aussie
Says the American posting in the Australian subreddit
#2!
You're not alone. It's dull and uninspiring. The only nice thing I can say is that it's not as dreary as God Save the Queen (/King).
Yes getting beaten by the WR holder huge choke.
Me when I am second or third, best on the entire planet at a specific athletic event, but Australians just say it’s a participation trophy.
If you think gold is the only thing that matters, well the US is beating Australia there right now.

To call silver and bronze "participation" medals is peak cope.
*shotguns beer* ... ahhh #2
The LA 2028 olympics is doing athletics first, then swimming so will be fun to see us rocket up the tally for once.
So only downhill from here then lol
I saw this morning that us had 30 medals.. so this was outdated when you posted it
They have for decades. It goes back to the cold war. The Eastern Bloc had stellar athletes who would win gold all the time at the Olympics which became a big morale problem. They had no chance of beating them in Golds, so the Americans started flooding in athletes to take Silver & Bronze and then switched their narrative to be about total medals so they would beat the USSR without having to actually beat them.
I’m sorry but why all the hate? To count silver and bronze as ‘participation certificates’ is absolutely absurd.
Australians are such bitter losers holy shit. It’s too bad nobody cares about your country, so it cant be deflected.
Didnt even age a day
WE'RE NUMBER 3! WE'RE NUMBER 3!
You should post bullshit in the America subreddit. Do you know what it is?
Well that was dreary and I’m glad we showed a bit of independence by not having the same one as the Brits. It’s when they get to the “girt by sea” bit that everyone flounders. How can anyone sing that with a straight face? And the line “for we are young”. Wtf does that mean “everyone in Australia is young” or “we are a young nation”? Either meaning is hugely offensive to a large number of people and not even true
finishing out of the podium is though. Clearly far from Molly's best swim.
Going into a race where one is favourite and not medalling is a choke. Maybe choke is too harsh a word, but an upset definitely happened.
I ain't Aussie bro
Just making a joke about usa making themselves number one by using total medal numbers rather than gold totals....relax lol
Realised I made an error on this comment and didn't realise until It was too late, I'm dead now anyways 💀🤣 was meant to say 7th instead of 4th
Why is that?
The US only have 5 gold though, so if ranking by that (which is standard for the Olympics), they won't appear in the top five.
It wasn't they had 30 medals but not enough gold
The other funny thing was the likes of australia and usa would say - yeh but it is inhumane to take children away from their families and put them in sports institutes. 

Then within a couple of decades australia set one up then the like of gb around 2000 olympics was like wtf and set them up as well. 

If you want elite athletes especially sports that young people excel at like gymnasitcs a part time school goer with daily lessons is unlikely to beat a full time institutionalised athlete where studies are done on the side of a treadmill...
The United States won the Gold Medal count in the following years of the modern Summer Olympics:

1896

1904

1912

1920

1924

1928

1932

1948

1952

1964

1968

1984

1996

2000

2004

2012

2016

2020

They were one of 66 nations who boycotted the 1980 Summer games.  They won 18 out of 25 (one boycott), so I’m assuming your argument must include Winter Olympics where the USA never does as well, but is still one of the overall all-time winners of Gold medals.
Me when I make something up online
Completely agree.  If 2nd and 3rd place finishes don’t actually count, then why award the silver and bronze medals at all?  Also, I’m sure that the Australian sprinter who won silver in the 200m at the 1968 Olympics would take some offense to that notion.
No.
Agree that "for we are young and free" is the most insensitive and offensive line, but that's why it isn't used anymore. It was officially changed to "for we are one and free" a few years ago.
The swimming will be held in the same venue as the opening ceremony. They need a week to convert it to a swimming pool.
Probably so the US team can start at the top and feel good about themselves
I think they're saying that because they saw a picture showing the US has 30 total, whereas this picture shows it is 28 total. 

People are testy because the US rejigs it to whatever way shows them on top, but if they'd just seen a post saying the US had a different total tally they're not wrong by pointing out this was outdated lol
Just saying the rankings were out of date since there were more medals awarded as op posted this
All I'm saying is that the above list only shows 28 medals for America. I only remember that because someone was making fun that Americans put themselves at the top. This morning the list they were referring to had 30 medals for America. Therefore OP list is old already when they posted
Replying to Zafara1... it’s funny because in 1980 and 1984 for the United States upset the Soviets in the winter Olympics as well so he’s literally just lying making up this whole narrative to make him sound intelligent, and to diminish the accomplishments of the United States Team, probably because of some underlining xenophobia
I tried r/America and r/UnitedStates but it doesn't really seem to be active. Very strange.
Oh thanks I’ve tried to avoid listening to it for so long I didn’t know that
Thank you
This is correct.  The opening ceremonies will held at SoFi stadium.  Then they will immediately hold the track and field events at the L.A. Coliseum.  And by the time they’re done with that they’ll have finished putting together the pool at SoFi.  It will be interesting to see how the swimmers react when they’re the ones who start late and have to deal with everyone else partying while they’re still competing.
What about the closing ceremony?
They're going to end up on top regardless of the order of events...
As of right now us is 7th because they have 5 golds
Thanks Darnell.
That doesn't stop them being really sad about not being on top at the start of the olympics under the normal schedule. Have a look at any of the daily medal tally posts on r/olympics and you'll see plenty of americans being upset about their 'poor performance' early on, even though they're expected to rocket to the top once track and field events start.

Putting track and field first in 2028 will let them have their nationalistic pride from day 1
You're welcome bro. Have a good day.
Being disappointed in your team's performance isn't uniquely American. You just see it more often from Americans because they literally make up over half the users engaging on this subreddit.

Obviously your gonna see more Americans in any state of emotion, whether it's happy, excited, angry or sad.

I mean sure, I was disappointed too, lol.

But I don't think that makes me different from someone from some other country.

Americans are just more visible obviously. There was a lot of disappointment to go around for non-Americans too, and if they all were more active on this subreddit, it might be more apparent.
All the best.
