
Great news fellow Melbournians.

Fuck off commercial property investors
Isn’t this bad for Adelaide but good for Melbourne? Shouldn’t other Capitals copy what Melbourne is doing so more people can afford a house?
>The ongoing slump for the Victorian city in July – attributed to more property listings and higher construction rates – was in stark contrast to other capital cities, with Perth, Adelaide, Brisbane, Sydney and Canberra all showing growth.

Yeah, so actually building houses and selling properties has meant Melbourne is doing exactly what the country needs. "Slump" is a ridiculous word to use.
Lol that's not how any of this works...
>Adelaide homes may soon be more expensive than Melbourne, with property prices falling in the Victorian capital for the fourth month in a row while prices in Adelaide continue to climb.
>
>Melbourne homes are now worth 4.4% less than they were at their peak in 2022, and fell 0.21% in July, according to PropTrack’s latest report.
>
>The ongoing slump for the Victorian city in July – attributed to more property listings and higher construction rates – was in stark contrast to other capital cities, with Perth, Adelaide, Brisbane, Sydney and Canberra all showing growth.
>
>Perth’s property market has seen the strongest annual growth, with a 22.77% increase this year, up 72.2% on March 2020 and the onset of the pandemic.
>
>Prices in Adelaide have risen by 14.81% over the year and 0.58% in July, with the median value of a dwelling in the South Australian capital currently sitting at $770,000.
Adelaide house prices have sky-rocketed recently. Similar to Perth. It's looking bad.
When you say "slump", do you mean "great news everyone, housing is slightly less unaffordable!!"
is it slumping or did everyone just move
Can anyone provide insight into how Melbourne has managed to buck the national/global trends of relentless property price growth? Despite being an extremely liveable and vibrant city, homes are remarkably affordable! 

My guesses include: 

1. More dwelling construction _per capita per annum_ (Melb builds roughly 8 dwellings per 1000 people each year, to Sydney’s 6)

2. Better renters rights potentially discouraging some speculative investors??

3. Flat land and a small bay allowing sprawl in all directions?
The house of cards is collapsing. I know someone who tried to exit the market by "breaking even" by pricing their place at the purchase price from 2 years ago plus stamp duty. The auction day came and went and ZERO people attended the auction. This is a house worth more than $1.5M, 3km from the Melbourne CBD.

Same story with a boomer couple trying to exit the market in the inner north. They will lose money in real terms if they sell in the current market.
Oh no! More people might be able to afford houses!
The once light hearted "fuck the Eastern states" rhetoric in WA is turning to become [pretty nasty](https://thewest.com.au/news/wa/no-property-hoarders-backlash-over-cashed-up-east-coast-investors-as-locals-fire-up-amid-tough-market-c-15382006) as every interstate pretends they're the wolf of wallstreet for thinking "oh yeah, Perth, houses are cheap because nobody lives there"

I met a bouncer who is seriously exercising the right to turn away ID's they don't recognise (anything except the state ID and a passport you are apparently allowed to turn away) to refuse entry to people from NSW in particular, I thought it was funny in the moment, but the housing cult is bringing out the ugly in people.
Oh no am I supposed to care here in Melbourne
Yeah but, like, they'll still be in Adelaide.
Yep, people think it's bad now. Wait until companies like Zillow in the US get their mits right into the industry here. Put shares in BCF because people will be buying tents!
it's great that you are saying this but they are all fucking off to perth.
Using the word "slump" to describe falling prices shows a bias in favour of people who want the price to be high.
It's kind of pointless to compare home values between Adelaide and Melbourne anyhow. 

Melbourne is over three times bigger in total area and population and has a much more diverse property market.
[deleted]
Isn't this primarily driven by people moving from Melbourne because it was too expensive and moving to cheaper cities like Brisbane and Adelaide, thereby raising the prices in those cities.
Political suicide for any government in states outside of VIC to implement a policy which will lower property prices, as majority of us are home owners.
I’d love a ‘slump’ here in Adelaide!
It is a slump if you own property in Melbourne and want or need to move to another state.
i have 80k saved up and have a 70k job. I just gave up and moved into my gf house which is REALLY fucking small 45+ mins from work for too much money.
Strong composition effect as well. Melbourne has significantly more units than Adelaide, where the proportion of Houses to Units is extremely high. If this analysis was limited to freestanding Houses, I’m sure you’d still see Melb much higher than Adelaide.
A big land tax increase has helped too. It’s very slightly tipped the ledger back to owner occupiers over investors.

If the Feds did something with NG tax reforms on existing dwellings things would be even better
Keep talking I'm nearly there :p
Looks like that house is worth LESS than $1.5m!
That’s not uncommon. Has been happening for all of time through all of markets. 

It’s winter, keep a close eye on the market into the spring and summer.

Don’t let the journalists use of manipulative words like “slump” so deeply influence you.
Property investment should be a long term strategy. 10+ years if not more as alternative to ETF stocks with long term prospects. 

However recent trends changed that and people think they can double up profits in few years 

It's like Bitcoin of property investment.

People exiting  to break even  because they purchased a house 2 years ago only means they don't know how (property ) investment works or should work at least .
do you think the rest of the country will be soon? or is this just isolated to melbs?
 GOOD! houses should stay in WA hands. fuck anyone else who didn't even look at the house just bought it cos it's cheaper. get fucked.
I'm from Brisbane. Believe me, *I get it*.

More power to him.
Are they falling? I thought they were just growing slower.

*clearly didn’t read article
and what is a "slump" the price going down 5% off a 50% record high is not a "slump" it still hasn't gone down.
[deleted]
Because they're high off that sweet, sweet stamp duty revenue.
I don’t get the downvotes. This is sad but apparently true. At least until a charismatic and visionary leader rises through the ranks of a major party lol.
What does a home owner need their property to increase in price? It's value as a home is unchanged because it isn't getting sold.
That's what it was like to move to Melbourne from another state. Also what it was like to move from Melbourne to Sydney.
Ah yes good point! *housing diversity* is a big factor - although just based on my limited perspective, Melbourne seems dominated by detached homes too, especially compared to Sydney and other larger cities
Ah interesting. I’ve just played around with the land tax calculator on the State Revenue Office website and I’m impressed that the threshold is $50k!! In NSW land values must now be over $1075k before land tax is applicable (for investors only of course). 

Some back of the napkin math suggests this extra land tax would also outweigh a great deal of NG savings… 

I wonder if this also discourages speculative investment that artificially boost real estate values.
Pretty much. Except that times everything bought since 2022. There are so many people about to crap the bed financially.
> That’s not uncommon. Has been happening for all of time through all of markets.

That's not going to convince the people who have had no appreciation in 2 years and can't sell without taking a loss. This is ignoring real costs they have incurred such as interest on loans etc. It's brutal out there. This doesn't happen all the time. This market is failing.

> It’s winter, keep a close eye on the market into the spring and summer.

When there are even more retrenchments, retail sales have truly tanked and people can't service their mortgages? I guess that happening while it's sunny makes all the difference, right?

> Don’t let the journalists use of manipulative words like “slump” so deeply influence you.

You're right. We should be using much stronger words. Collapse. Correction. Ponzi Scheme. The Era of free money is over.
this is true. if it's the same in spring and summer then maybe it's the beginning? i think the dead cat bounce has already come and gone.
yes 
The typical Queenslander parochialism - hate anyone who’s not a white bogan Queenslander
Its also as the article has indicated the increase in  the number of houses being built. 

 Its always amusing reading articles where people are expecting a magic silver bullet that fixes  the housing issue. 

The problem has to be attacked on every policy front from taxation, nimby's, property developers land banking, planning laws and state governments stupid zoning policies along with the biggest factor increasing the number of houses that are being  built. But the selfish and the greedy want their free tattslotto first division win in house prices.
Less than a thousand jobs is a drop in a bucket when we’re talking about a population of 1.2m
60-70% of voters are invested in real estate. It’s not about stamp duty.
In the middle of buying a place in Melb & there looks to be way more maximizing utilisation of lots, putting a subdivided house out the backyard or combining 2 lots to build 5-8 small townhouses/villas compared to Sydney. The area I'm looking in is pretty much all being turned into townhouse / villas so getting 2-3x amount of housing out of each lot & that's 30-40min out of the city.

I'm not fussed if that means I don't see crazy capital growth in what I buy as it's primarily a place for me to live, that I can actually afford.
To sell within 2 years and expect profit is ridiculous. Property is a long term investment. The transaction fees of buying and selling mean house flipping is not really possible in Australia.
People have been waiting for a collapse for the last 14 years I’ve been on Reddit.

It isn’t happening. House prices will not go down a significant amount.

And if they do, we’re all fucked, especially the people who can’t afford a house now.
I do now.


It took 3 years and a swarm of people descending on Brisbane like locusts on a grain field, but my heart did finally harden. 
Needs to happen in all our cities especially Adelaide if this article is correct.
