
Qld spent millions in a similar inquiry with the same outcome, but yeah nah the police commissioner said yeah nah and the premier has a teenage daughter so we’ll continue ruining lives over a plant less harmful than alcohol
The only people who benefit from cannabis being illegal at this point are the NSW Police Force. Plenty of roadside drug tests to administer, gives them an excuse to harass people with drug detection dogs and offers a flimsy justification as to why innocent people strip searched after being stopped by said dogs are frequently found with no drugs on them.
There are a lot of great arguments in favor of decriminalization presented at this and many other enquiries, not to mention the overwhelming body of research.

But it's all irrelevant, because the decision is not made on practical grounds but 100% political ones. Too many voters with outdated backwards views on drugs for decriminalization to be politically viable.
Legal or not, I’m getting fuckin blazed when I get out of work today.
Fix the roadside drug testing methods. its ridiculous you can be banned for a substance days old and not in anyway impairing you now.
The fact that cannabis is criminal is criminal in and of itself.
"Chris Minns rejects" - why the fuck even have this inquiry if any signficant change to what is probably the least harmful (currently illegal) drug is already ruled out??
Why is NSW Labor so lame? "Chris Minns rejects decriminalisation" okay let's just keep ruining lives for plants then, okay cool. Very great government, so with the times and everything.
Go to the doctor and discuss your anxiety/pain issues.

Get a script for weed and go to the pharmacy and get your weed at a reasonable price.

Consume as required.

It's not ideal but this is the space that will be pushing for greater access and allows a degree of governmental control.

Weed production in Aus is already dominated at the corporate/industrial level.

Oh, and anyone driving a car and is impaired due to any drug taking needs to lose their licence.
This is Australia! We don't do evidence based policy here. Gtfo
Put Chris minns in the bins.
I'll sum it up. 'You want it, but I don't'- unrepresentative power monger, Chris Minns.
Whilst the cops have any political sway this will NOT happen. Reduced drugs offences means they have to justify their budget more, it means less jail cells occupied and less slave labour in prisons, and requires less police numbers on the streets. Never going to happen.
And nothing notably bad happened in Canada when we legalized it a few years ago.

But I do now sleep through the night with my homemade THC rice krispy squares or chocolate rasberry pecan cookies.

I use the Wappa strain for a nice relaxed night. And a full rest instead of waking up at 3am.
Considering NZ’s recent plebiscite failed don’t expect anything. Young people over there really underestimated the pushback amongst boomers/silent generation and multicultural communities.
No shit sherlock.
Since this is an issue close to my heart, and as a QLD resident I partially paid for that report, I just wanted to provide some sources for your claims.

[This is the Queensland Productivity Commission Report](https://apo.org.au/node/273991) that was delivered to the Palaszczuk Labour Government in 2020.

Brisbane Times summarized its summary [here](https://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/politics/queensland/qld-labor-members-call-for-cannabis-to-be-legalised-stubbed-out-20230111-p5cbws.html) and [here](https://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/politics/queensland/while-queensland-locks-up-more-addicts-drug-use-has-increased-20200131-p53wfh.html) (Soft paywall).

Highlights of the report include:

* Criminalisation has been in place for many decades, but it has proven ineffective at significantly reducing the consumption of illicit drugs, and it has not achieved sustained reductions in supply," it wrote.

* Legalising and regulating the supply of lower-harm drugs, such as MDMA and cannabis, would boost the state budget by $1.2 billion, funnel $4 billion out of illegal markets and into health systems, and address prison overcrowding.

* Even in those jurisdictions where supply has been legalised, most evidence suggests there has been no long-term increase in usage or drug-related harms,

* The 516-page report recommended MDMA and cannabis be removed from Queensland's criminal code.

* The commission said fully legalising and regulating the supply of lower-harm drugs such as cannabis and MDMA would give the Queensland taxpayer a net benefit of $1.2 billion.

Our government response was:

* Annastacia Palaszczuk said "not on my watch." verbally, and "The government acknowledged that police officers with "long-standing experience" supported decriminalisation but it still had "no intention of altering any drug laws in Queensland" officially.

* The LNP said "no".

* Former federal police commissioner Mick Palmer said while criminal sanctions remain for personal drug use, it would be impossible to provide the necessary level of health and safety services to people with drug issues.

* "Diversion and reducing penalties are harm-reduction measures that are important steps forward, but until we see more ambitious measures, including the removal of criminal sanctions for personal use, we will not be able to get drug deaths under control," said Mr Palmer, who is also a spokesman for the Take Control campaign.

In 2020 they said "The government will instead consider expanding diversionary methods for minor drug offences." ... which they actually seem to have done about 3 
years later, based on [this article](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-04-20/drug-laws-end-to-war-on-drugs-qld-advocates-say/102235406) last year.

Edit: I would like to add that if you **are** a regular cannabis user, Australia is currently in its [Weed Card](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CRm1yqSmsGY) stage of regulation. Head on over to any of the Australian medical cannabis reddit groups to find out which online clinic will give you a script quickly and cheaply for your insomnia. You'll then be able to get your Cannabis legally and easily at your favorite participating Pharmacy. Don't expect to be paying anything less than you do on the street though. You still can't drive legally in Mainland Australia for a few weeks after your last use. If you're in an accident and they take your blood and there's any THC (which hangs around for up to 28 days); you'll be in trouble.
I wonder if part of it is that it would surely involve reducing police powers? something the police are not keen on.. unsurprising, sadly
I'm willing to bet if they go as far as legalising it, we will see a decline in alcohol related violence.
Victoria also held an inquiry on this. I spoke to some of the stakeholders who participated in the Inquiry, such as community legal centeres and the lawyers who work there, and they said nearly EVERY submission recommended decriminalisation. It was so overwhelming, they became optimistic it might actually result in reforms.

One lawyer told me they received a call the night before the final report was to be released and was told 'they tanked the findings'. Victorian inquiry doubled down on cannabis being dangerous and effectively recommended further measures to prevent and reduce cannabis use instead. It's unbelievable how far behind Australia is on this issue and we're pissing away millions on inquiries for no other reason than the state needs to pretend an 'independent' inquisatorial forum showed their decision to keep it criminalised is 'best practice'. Australia's use of government inquiry is beyond manipulative - full of official discourse to keep driving the status quo.
[removed]
[removed]
And criminals. They benefit just as much.
Don't forget those who profit off alcohol, tobacco, and whatever other legal drugs would be displaced.
Survey data show's its largely the the older part of the boomer generation and silent generation against it. If we were to have a plebiscite on either decriminalization or full legalization it would probably pass. 

https://www.vice.com/en/article/4a3pm9/half-australians-support-decriminalising-cannabis
It ain't happening while SkyNews exists.
Does anyone know how big of an impact minns statement will have on the outcome? Is his just an opinion or will it significantly sway the vote?
Even when you come through the Airport you could can get pulled up on returning from Bali or Thailand where the smoke and resin is etched into furniture. I used to stay at hostels and at night the whole place was a cannabis cloud. Then you have to go through all the BS because you slept on a mattress  where previous smokers, partied all night smoking and doing drugs. Now when I do travel I go to the laundry and wash everything 2 times before returning. The harassment and time " hold" is frustrating because they never believe you. I once had a new Macpac shredded with no compensation because the dog smelt it on me. 600 bucks gone!
Yep, until that is fixed there is zero chance cannabis will be decriminalized.
He wants to die on this hill for some reason.
> Comsume as required

2 days later do road side test. Lose licence. Lose job.
GOATed comment keep up the good work legend
NZ is only 6 hours after to drive
Hey mate. Awesome read! Cheers. I want to bring up the testing of THC in your system though. As some one who has used cannabis in manny forms for years while working FIFO i have learned a great deal about urine and saliva tests. 
I’ve seen saliva tests not pick up THC  on a person who smoked 2-3 hours ago. When it comes to urine tests I’ve always given myself 2 weeks to remove the drug from system and never failed. 
I recently gave it a week! I’ve been taking large doses of prescription THC & CBD blend from cannatrek and after a week of no use I still passed a urine test. Yes you are right in saying it stays in your system for 28 days but I think it’s to do with how much you consume and how often that the active ingredients cause a fail by going over the threshold . I could be wrong though.
More about not reducing their budgets.
[https://www.marijuanamoment.net/legalizing-marijuana-leads-to-substantial-decrease-in-intimate-partner-violence-study-shows/](https://www.marijuanamoment.net/legalizing-marijuana-leads-to-substantial-decrease-in-intimate-partner-violence-study-shows/)
Its never going to happen in Australia and  its more likely that abortion will be made illegal we are becoming so cooked with the US ideology brainwashing. They never want to examine the evidence from countries like the Netherland where it has been an overwhelming success and it  certainly is not a nation of dope heads.
Your [comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/1egxpai/decriminalising_personal_use_of_cannabis_would/lfx1632/?context=3) in /r/australia was automatically removed because you used a URL shortener or content cache.

These are not permitted in /r/australia as they impair our ability to enforce link blacklists.

Please re-post your comment using direct, full-length URL's only.


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Your [comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/1egxpai/decriminalising_personal_use_of_cannabis_would/lfx1mlz/?context=3) in /r/australia was automatically removed because you used a URL shortener or content cache.

These are not permitted in /r/australia as they impair our ability to enforce link blacklists.

Please re-post your comment using direct, full-length URL's only.


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Yes, they said NSW Police Force.
We're just folks trying to make a living supplying herb and not hurting anyone
Don’t worry they’ll claim there’s gun shot residue in your sock
It failed in New Zealand, and I'd argue they're more progressive than we are.
> Survey data show's its largely the the older part of the boomer generation and silent generation against it.

Yeah, just like literally any other moderately beneficial law change in Australian history
They prefer laws that protect pedophile institutions.
It's a wedge Labor doesn't need, both at a state and federal level. Like marriage equality it'll need overwhelming public support and a centrist coalition call.

Labor has casual supporters to lose. LNP would have centrists to gain and a grumbling "family values" fringe with nowhere to go.
This would happen regardless of where you get your weed from and regardless of legalities.

This is part of managing your drug/vehicle use until there is a better test for impairment.

If you have difficulty with  that then you probably should not take drugs.
Hey mate, do you have any more info on this?
I too, haven't tested it.

Certainly the consensus of people who have been roadside tested is it's very common to get false negatives (ie. people who've passed the test the same day they've vaped flower or taken oil). 

Rumor has it it's much better at detecting it after you've smoked it - but I keep getting called out with people who know how the tests work saying they shouldn't (ie. they don't work that way)

But, the general consensus is that if you vape flower, brush your teeth and use alcohol mouthwash, you're very unlikely to get pinged at a roadside drug (saliva) test the next day.

The real risk is if you have an accident where you end up unconscious and in hospital. In this instance, they take your bloods and do a tox-screen. This is when the stakes are highest, because even if you aren't at fault, if the other party got seriously hurt, you'll be facing criminal charges for drug driving causing injury. You might be cleared for those charges, but you'll be defending them in court. In this instance, there's very little anecdotal evidence - so we're relying on the scaremongering information from the 80's that "THC STAYS IN YOUR SYSTEM FOR 28 DAYS!".

I think it's safe to say many medical cannabis patients take the risk and drive illegally the next day or the day after (especially those who live in the 98% of Australia's landmass that has laughable public transport options) when they're not impaired but would still fail a drug test. 

I also think a lot of medical cannabis patients probably drive impaired - because if there's no legal distinction between 5 minutes later or the day after, why not? - but this is definitely a case of don't ask don't tell on social media.
It's also about being able to use 'I smell weed' as an excuse to search someone
But many US states have legalised marijuana
Legalisation is inevitable with the amount of people already consuming it and the shifting attitudes towards it from the general public. ACT has already done it, the other states will follow later, though it may take a long time.
You say that, but you can literally telehealth a script in 20 minutes and get weed delivered to your door. The politics behind this are about appeasing both conservative and progressive voters whilst not pissing off industry lobby groups. 

Ironically to your comment, America is way more legal than Australia when it comes to cannabis.
Weirdly, NZ is progressive on some things but conservative on others. The referendum was something like 51% against to 49% for so it was close.
An exit polling breakdown after that referendum showed that the highest levels of opposition where among the 65+, people who said they where religious and immigrant communities.


As someone who supports legalisation I would argue that frequently the people who undermine the legalisation case are actually the most proactively supporters unfortunately.
Tell someone who’s had two beers the night before that they can’t drive today because they’re ’impaired’.

This is what medical cannabis users face every day. A spliff the night before will be evident on a saliva test the next morning.
Thats the point, that legal reform is needed. 

Can legally drive while nodding off on oxy.
Can't legaly drive, uninhibited, 2 days after cannabis.
The argument against looking into better tests for impairment is that it's already illegal so detection is enough.
Absolutely agree!!
Yeah agreed, that’s what I’m angling at. It’s a convenient excuse for them at the moment.
>  though it may take a long time

nanny state. :/
Well whether you like it or not, the beer drinker is managing his drug use and is fully aware that he can legally drive the next day.

Until there is a better test for impairment medical cannabis users have to mange their drug/vehicle usage.

I doubt it it some stoner sitting on the couch that will come up with a solution for this.

There is massive corporate investment in cannabis and they may already be working on this.

Until then, it is up to the user to manage drug/driving.

This is what booze drinkers and prescription drug users do every day.
Can't legally drive whilst nodding off on oxy. We do have impairment based drug driving laws for every other substances. Cannabis is the one singled out for mere presence, not impairment.
That's the point, that legal reform is needed.

I'm glad to see that you agree with me.

Until then, it is a personal management problem whether you like it or not.
It's an argument - not a good one though.
Then don't expect the law to change anytime soon.

So the issue remains one of personal responsibility and what course of action is in the best interest of the user.
Um no, until the government has an accurate test, they shouldn’t be prosecuting people at all. 

Name a single other crime that you can be convicted for where the only evidence available is known to be flawed at best
I think this is because of the long half life that THC has (1-3 days in occasional users and 5-13 days for chronic users) and perhaps a need for research that can establish with relatively clear and replicatable concentration- response curve, for lack of a better word, for cognitive impairment with THC.
Can you please point me in the direction of that law. I am unable to find it
Thats like saying the stairs to a building is just a personal management problem for someone in a wheelchair
Ok but this is literally a comment thread on an article about changing the fucking laws.
Prosecuting people for drug driving will only continue.

Research shows Australian jurisdictions have a significant drug driving problem.

In fact, crash-based research studies have found the prevalence of drugs in Australian fatal crashes.

The traumatic effects of drug driving will be of more community concern then the rights of a cannabis taker.

I really don't care what drugs people take and in what combinations.

I'm sure most other people don't give a fuck either.

Prohibition never works and the positive results of liberal drug legislation can be seen from  Portugal.

At the present, cannabis and car usage is a personal management  issue.

At one stage someone who was stoned could continue driving after been alcohol breath tested  as they may have got a legal reading.

As  cannabis usage laws are  freeing up there is this added responsibility on the user to be  aware of the consequences of driving within those laws.

Again, the traumatic effects of drug driving will be of more community concern then the rights of a cannabis taker.
s112 road transport act. 

A person must not, while under the influence of alcohol or any other [drug](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1069941)—

* (a)[drive](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1072257) a [vehicle](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1069674), or
* (b)occupy the driving seat of a [vehicle](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1069674) and attempt to put the [vehicle](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1069674) in motion, or
* (c)if the person is the holder of an applicable [driver licence](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1070975) (other than an applicable [provisional licence](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1075641) or applicable [learner licence](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1088917))—occupy the seat in or on a [motor vehicle](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1069737) next to a learner [driver](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1072655) who is driving the [vehicle](https://jade.io/article/292544/section/1069674).

  
Oxy included in the definition of a drug, not just illegal drugs.
And my original comment was that the law is changing all be it slowly and it is possible to get weed very easily and in a legal fashion.

I also commented about driving impairment.

Commenters seem upset that the changing laws are about cannabis usage  do not extend to driving.

It is others who have pushed the discussion in the "but I only smoked a bowl three days ago, officer" direction and I have responded to that push mainly because they appear to see the issue in terms of black and white.

Which I find a bit sad as even countries such as Portugal are wrestling with the driving and drugs issues.
>Prosecuting people for drug driving will only continue.

Of course because we'll continue to have people like you who will continuously throw logic out the window to deep throat the narrative.

We should be prosecuting for driving under the *influence*/inebriation.

A test that shows that you smoked weed in the past 30 days does not prove that. All it does it allow you to skew statistics and push some narrative that 'they had WEED in their system' to ensure you activate the pearl clutching on your standard emotionally driven moron.
Define drug driving? Pretty sure if a substance is detected, it is deemed to be a factor. So someone who had a bowl 3 days ago and gets into a crash will be considered in drug driving stats despite the use having nothing to do with the accident.

Yes, it is peoples responsibility to be aware of the laws. But that doesn't change the fact the laws are stupid right now and not based on safety needs.
Ah yes the old 'they had weed in their system from 2 weeks ago so therefore it was a factor in the car crash' argument.
So this is part of my original comment.

" Oh, and anyone driving a car and is impaired due to any drug taking needs to lose their licence."

My argument has always been about impairment but it appears it is you who cannot follow that logic.

It is you that is raging about some "narrative".

Explaining that cannabis users have to have an understanding of the current law and have to work within that is not pearl clutching it is just logic.

There is nothing emotional in that it is straight up logic.

The only reference to  statistics I have made have been in regards to fatal road crashes and drug use not what happened 30 days before hand.

Don't create your own narrative, assign it to me, criticise  it and then expect me defend it - no logic there at all.
Did you read my original post?

I stated "Oh, and anyone driving a car and is impaired due to any drug taking needs to lose their licence."

So if you apply simple comprehension skills here I am defining drug driving as impairment.

Legal interpretation of impairment is open to change. I remember alcohol limits changing from 0.08 to 0.05.

Was that a good thing or a bad thing? I heard plenty of people raging about it.

Arguing that a law is "stupid" probably will not sway a magistrate.

I don't think that your opinion on what is stupid or not will influence legislation either.

It is the vested interest of the financially invested who will win out.
Why are you arguing against yourself? Or are you actually just dumb? Slow down and read what you're writing.

Someone who has taken THC the previous evening for anxiety insomina whatever and then drives the next day some 12-14 hours after consuming would not be impaired by the drug.
the gaslighting stinks worse than the bud mate. have you ever looked into the effects of stress on driving? people are bending the rules to avoid stiffening up under them. that is personal management happening on a large scale. largely ignored too. bcuz criminals
That's great that it's how you're defining it. But then talking about "research" on drug driving suggests someone elses definition. 

No one is trying to sway a magistrate, we're trying to sway politicians into changing the laws. 

The "traumatic effects of drug driving" are immaterial when we are talking about drug driving laws that have no rational link to the traumatic effects IE people who aren't at all impaired.
