
I have honey jumbles in the WW Big Book of Beautiful Biscuits, and the WW Sweet Old Fashioned Favourites. The recipes are slightly different to each other, and the Arnotts recipe is different again.
Quick, someone compare it to the recipe in the Big Book of Beautiful Biscuits.
Appreciate this article (mostly) getting right to it, instead of telling us the writer’s life story before the recipe
Arnott’s Honey Jumbles Ingredients:
Wheat Flour, Sugar, Golden Syrup, Honey (6%), Vegetable Oil, Humectant (E422), Eggs, Salt, Baking Powder, Ginger Gelatine, Flavour, Antioxidant (E307b from Soy), Food Colours (Cochineal, Allura Red AC, Brilliant Blue FCF), Emulsifier (Soy Lecithin).

Hmm, seems a bit different to the recipe…
Excellent! Now if someone can find original recipe TimTams...
80’s memory unlocked.
Where do I get the recipe from please? Honey Jumbles are my favourites biscuits, I use to eat the whole packet in a couple of hours
You could say the secret ingredient is… salt.
And they give it to us in cup measurements? 
Please try all three and report back on your results. Thanks.
_With my mother coming from (insert random country here), I grew up with a great appreciation for good food and blah blah blah..._
r/Karencooks
It's probably just the at-home conversion recipe with no preservatives in it at all.

Someone probably designs a nice recipe with a similar manner they have listed in the article, and then food scientists probably convert and optimise it for mass production and shelf stability.
Gelatine was for the longevity of the icing texture I think (wish they didn’t need it as I don’t eat it and it’s in most of their icing topped biscuits)
Follow OP link
Australian metric cups, Australian metric tea/tablespoons, and grams yes.
Pretty good of them to scale it down for us. Their recipe would probably be in the hundreds of kg for the main ingredients.
That's easy then
Is this not the standard for literally every recipe?

You want to get the scales out for every single ingredient?
And invite us all over for the tasting!
*My hubby blah blah blah and fifteen kids love to eat horse blah blah blah our culinary journey from the christian homeland blah blah blah*
... and to maximise cheap bulk ingredients (source: uncle was a food chemist).
Yeah and the use of cochineal as a food colouring - crushed up beetles 🤢 I avoid that too as well as gelatine
I've got a recipe for ginger bread at home, from Crown Casino. Starts with 110kg of honey.  (Was for a massive house we built for Christmas one year)
You know that measurements in kg also scale down, right? Arguably, it would be *easier* to do move from kg to grams than having to switch units of measurement and also scaling down.

Plus, it's almost always better to use weight than volume when baking.
I prefer it personally. Just stick the bowl on the scales and tare the weight as you go.
This is the standard for impractical method and inconsistent results, yes.
Is it difficult for you to get your scales?
There's nothing particularly dangerous about cochineal red. In any case, it's processed so far that nothing of the original beetle remains in the dye.
Beetles are some of, if not the most nutrient dence naturally occurring food source. It's the food of the future!
> Pretty good of them to scale it down for us  


> You know that measurements in kg also scale down

Yes.
Is it difficult to fill up a teaspoon?
It’s certainly more fuckin annoying to measure shit out to the gram than just scooping a cup out for the same result yes
Nothing? Than why bother using it?
I know it’s not dangerous - just not necessary!
How full a teaspoon is, is incredibly subjective, how much 4-5g is, isn't. Especially with something like flour, if you take a cup straight from the bag vs if you pour the flour into the cup can be up to 30-50g of difference due to the way flour compacts, whereas 120g is always 120g unless your scale is well and truly borked.
Weight is generally a more accurate measurement than volume- think the difference between brown sugar, and brown sugar that's been tamped down. And a little trick- zero out the bowl, add an ingredient by weight, then zero it again for the next one. No need to dirty a measuring cup, just pour the ingredients in!
Perhaps because the alternatives are worse? Red nnn ?

I'd rather not use beetles, either. But it's better than synthetic alternatives.
>  No need to dirty a measuring cup, just pour the ingredients in!

Someone grew up without a dishwasher
Beetles. Beetroot. Both are beets…
That isn't what I meant. 
Normie said that nothing of the beetle remains. If nothing remains why use it?
Yeah, anyone who didn't grow up middle class didn't have one, what's your point? Still better to not dirty random things when there's literally no need for it.
Beetroot-flavoured honey jumbles?
