First time watching the olympics while living in the US - safe to say Cate Cambell has ruffled some feathers.
Girt. We are girt.
I'm gonna be real with you, I don't particularly care for the Olympics and I haven't watched it at all. However, seeing Americans get mad on the internet because Australians keep winning in swimming has been a sort of patriotic entertainment I wasn't expecting to get out of the event.
[deleted]
Interesting how they project a ton of silver medals instead of gold - it's as if the USA isn't number one.
Fella has to go to the toilet.
Hah still not as funny as when their country is so insecure about their own supremacy that have to change the way medals are counted as to appear on top of the world.  

Then again is Channel 9 really that much different, according to their broadcasts Australia is the only team that matters in the world. 

They are so many great sporting stories every day, that get lost in countries cherry-picking their content.
I’m pretty sure the US has always sorted based on total medals whereas everywhere else I know of sort based on number of gold first.
As an Australian living in the US the coverage here is equal parts amusing and infuriating.
Such a bitchy Olympics.
Does the Sonos Beam not annoy you covering the bottom of the tv? Was thinking the same but haven’t because of this exact reason
Watch trash channels, you get fed trash
Why are you guys so obsessed with how they're presenting the medal tallies?
I saw a comment somewhere recently by an American complaining about the Aussies winning in the swimming, and a reply stating "while your kids are learning active shooter drills, ours are taking swimming lessons" and just... wow.
Australian TV should do one — swimming gold medals per million people and total swimming medals per million people.

It’ll be fun to watch them apply the grease to wiggle their way out of this one.
What is with this obsession over America and their medal tally?
Yall still counting golds? Asking for a friend.
Looking at the current medal tally indicates this is the correct take tho
🇺🇸
Let’s project gold medals. Who’s number one exactly?
Why is not being discussed more? Makes no sense..
As an American, I get ticked off by the way we count medals. The gold medal quite literally indicates the winner of the event. I know why we do it (to make ourselves look better), but doesn’t mean it isn’t annoying and/or silly.

I also can confirm, NBC presents the Olympics as if the U.S. and the U.S. alone are competing. Thankfully our streaming services for the games is very sound, so you can individually select any live event you’d like.

This really comes in handy every time coverage of a medal event is switched over to whatever we’re doing in a prelim.

Again, I get why they do it - it is an American broadcast. But it’s a bit annoying.
They've been doing it since at least the early days of the internet, which is when I started encountering their weird-arse tables of medals.
It makes sense they'd do that, they have a gigantic population *and* they're a very wealthy country that can afford to spend a lot on elite athletics infrastructure, so they should have a massive breadth of athletes that can do well in all events, making total medal count a very flattering statistic for America.
It’s crazy right?

I will say the quality of the coverage is crazy. With peacock you can literally watch any event
In terms of screen impact, not at all. The fact that it blocks the ir sensor for the remote, but only impacts turning the tv on and off - extremely.
I mean... it's on Channel 9 here....
?
Did they also mention the US would be winning the Olympics again?
I'd love to see medals per capita.
Just taking the piss.
Is it really though? Who has more gold medals than the USA?
Do you geniunely think that silver and bronze medals should have zero ranking in the olympics at all despite the fact that prize money and medals are handed to those recipients?
Participation medals count, right?
I'm actually in the US at the moment and they re-order the medal count to show America on the top rather than what the official Olympic medal tally shows. It's astounding and also rather stupid!
Because moving the decimal place is so hard.  Also, as the US Constitution puts it so eloquently, “We the Capitas”
Check the comment date nerd
At the very least make a weighted system, yes. Of course every medal gold, silver, or bronze is special - but if one actually wants to rank countries during the games, gold medals should hold more value.

Then again, I think ranking them at all during the games is quite silly. But, if you were to rank, I do so with a point system:

Gold - 4 points
Silver - 2 points 
Bronze - 1 point

I think this would maintain the worth of a gold but honor those who have medaled silver and bronze. 

Again though, I think the ranking system as a whole is quite silly to begin with.
Do you guys really dismiss the silver and bronze medals of Olympic athletes or are you guys just talking shit/taking the piss?

Seems hugely disrespectful. Some countries and athletes will only win silver or bronze and their efforts and achievements should never be diminished or belittled.
We count Gold, if the count is equal we count the next most valuable medal.

Adjusting for population might be the fairest method.
Are you saying Australia doesn't care about silver and bronze medals? 

I can imagine some countries might if winning gold is a common achievement.

But for other countries they might never win gold, or very rarely.

I would never say their silver and bronze doesn't matter.
Again, adjusting for population may be the fairest method.  
Then a tiny island nation of a few 100k with one medal, any medal, would be revealed as truly hitting above its weight class, an outstanding effort.
That's fine. I'm not the one calling silver and bronze participation trophies like what's happening on this subreddit.

You can do all the adjustments you want and sort medal tables how ever you want to take into account population. People do it every Olympics on r/dataisbeautiful.

But what you shouldn't do is diminish silver and bronze just for the sake of taking jabs at America. Those are still worth something to athletes and they work really hard for them.

Some countries will only win bronze and you people try to act like they're worthless just because you don't like that the US sorts their medal table by total medals instead of gold medals.
