
Attempted strangulation is a known precursor behaviour to murder. Wild that police would delay on acting on any arrest in those cases
I feel like I'm going fucking crazy when I see these domestic violence "blitzes". 

> SA Police said officers targeted **265 known offenders** and attended 394 addresses last month during the first "dedicated and statewide anti-domestic abuse" action in the state

What the fuck are you doing with your time otherwise? On the roadside with a Rogan podcast, waiting to ping someone for 4kmh over? Strip-searching at festivals and sniffing people at train stations? 

Stop telling us how important and novel these operations are - we're well fucking aware. We all just thought you were fucking doing it already.

Tell me why we even bother telling women to come forward, if police actually fucking doing something about it is such an event that it is given an Operational codename and warrants a press conference.
I want to say it's bad news, but it is also good news.

I'd be interested to follow the progress of these cases.
How many cops got arrested?
Think very carefully about why there is a delay friend
It’s notoriously difficult to prove (in a court of law, beyond all reasonable doubt) that DV is occurring unless the police just happen to walk in on it. It’s a crime that happens behind closed doors and doesn’t always leave physical evidence. There’s no witnesses most of the time.
What was I doing? Preparing a report for the coroner, attending the death of a 2yo, looking for an 11yo child, locating and arresting a crook who had stolen an retired pensioners car and not getting a meal break. That's the last 4 days.

It would be nice to do some of the things you mentioned.
Wouldn’t be surprised if the entire operation was paid overtime. That is pretty much the only time cops get to do anything that isn’t going job to job to job. Not enough cops to follow up on things so they sit in the background until all the jobs are cleared up.
> What the fuck are you doing with your time otherwise? On the roadside with a Rogan podcast, waiting to ping someone for 4kmh over? Strip-searching at festivals and sniffing people at train stations?


Yes. Downvote me police apologists.
Yeah but evidently what they were doing was executing warrants they've been sitting on, or attending addresses to perform mandated AVO compliance checks - this is shit they should be doing every day.
I don't dispute that everyday cops are dealing with abhorrence on a daily basis. But you would agree that leadership are politicized freaks, resource allocation is cooked and command do not adequately represent. You and I both know what dealing with MAU/PDU is like.

Why are you going through this bullshit, while command spends $60m on SOG training facilities and buying dumb toys like bearcats? Why are we sending cops with sniffer dogs to festivals when there's a stack of DV warrants awaiting execution? Why are we making stations closed overnight, and spending half a billion dollars on PORT to do shit like beat up protestors?
are you denying any of that happens or did I just imagine getting strip searched in a public train station bathroom on my way to work because a dog "sniffed" something on me

what even is this comment
Agreed, and what’s happened here is that somebody wanted to send a message to those in charge that if we actually do something, we can get real outcomes. The blitz is a message that goes both directions: down to the perps, we’re watching you; and up to the people who decide how much police time should be directed to each type of crime, we need to be allowed to actually work on these cases.
394 addresses were visited, only 21 people actually had warrants to be arrested.

These operations typically mean pooling together resources from multiple units and areas to focus on particular objectives. To operate like this all the time, they would need to ignore all offences unless they are DV related.

You apply for a warrant when you've made attempts to arrest and other enquiries. It's not a default thing that happens, police aren't just taking reports and sitting on it.
