
Those eggs are two different sizes
Larger eggs are harvested later in the season which costs more rather than picking them earlier and regrowing more for more profit.
Large vs x/large.
Don't buy them
Disregarding your eggs are different, I fucking hate proportional pricing with a passion

I don't want a 1kg jar of whatever for $10, I don't have space for it or I'm not going to use it all, but the smallest 250g one will be $6. Fuck right off 

A lot of the time I just end up frustrated by this and don't buy any. You've proven you can sell it at $1/100g, so give me the small jar so shit won't go to waste for $2.50
And if the chickens are laying more of the larger size of eggs, they're going to be cheaper.
Excuse me herbse34 - I believe you may be mistaking cackleberries for capsicums
It’s literally cheaper for them to make a larger size, per unit of product.

There’s a fairly constant overhead to package an item, regardless of the size of the item. For smaller items, that overhead makes a much larger percentage of the cost to produce the item.

You’re not being penalised for buying a smaller item, you’re just incentivised to buy a larger one. If you don’t need it, don’t spend the extra $4 - you don’t have to, so don’t.
You realise that if companies charge flat pricing, the flat pricing will default to the equivalent of the 250g for $6 package, right? Not the 1kg for $10. Because they may have proven they can sell it at $1/100g, but they've ALSO proven they can sell it at $2.40/100g. They won't drop the price to the lowest unit, nimrod.
..why would they be cheaper? It's still just \*more egg\*?
Chookies don't dictate what size egg pop out.  If you have a farm with all the same breed of chickens, some will lay small eggs, some will lay large eggs, some will lay extra large eggs.

It's the same with cows and milk, some produce more milk than others.
So a 350g cardboard cereal box is significantly more expensive to produce than a 1kg cardboard cereal box? Get out of here

Why are 12 eggs $5 but 6 eggs are $4? Chickens getting paid overtime? It's a fraction more material to use half a carton and produce an extra wall. The difference in stacking them in boxes and shipping is negligible
Thats approximately 28.75% more egg per egg.
if there's more supply of something they'll charge less bc there's less demand per item
Older hens lay larger eggs. If the farm has more older hens than younger hens, they'll produce more large eggs than small eggs.
No? You didn’t read my comment very well.

The cost of 6 eggs might be $1 and the cost of 12 eggs is therefore $2. Then the cost to deliver those eggs to you, including labour and packaging and transport and other costs, is a flat $3. Hence the prices.
The overhead attributed to each item is encompassed by more than just the cost of the cardboard box- overheads include the indirect costs to manufacturing. Often these are a fair amount of what we all pay for! So all the extra stuff to run a business like head office costs. 

Plus like the other poster said- they want you to buy more of a product. Producers and manufacturers want to sell more of something for a range of reasons - such as giving you the risk of wastage and not them. Sometimes it is actually easier for them to distribute larger sized stuff because of preset sizes set by their distributors or trucks or containers plus. More items does cost more time, to package, box, stack, process, etc- some goods are still processed by hand.
For your cereal box example, it requires almost 3 times the packaging, for one thing. Instead of 1 box to enclose one kilo, it's 3  (ok, not quite three, but you get the idea.)
Eggonomics confuses me
Egg is egg. A bigger egg has more egg. It will not be cheaper.

It's not the same as a substitute item with more supply, it's literally the same thing.
Except it's done by volume not by units. Food is all made and packed by machines

Ever been into a krispy kreme? Seen the doughnuts on the conveyor belt?

You can buy 4 of them for $15, or 12 of them for $25. Literally not touched by a human until you tell them how big of a box you want and they turn around and put them in

OK so now we need to ship them somewhere. So they go in a LARGER box. 10 x 12 packs, but we can also fit 30 x 4 packs into the same box. And we then send those 2 boxes off to the exact same place.

And somewhere, somehow, magically along this journey, the 30 x 4 packs are now worth $450, and the 10 x 12 packs are worth $250

Fuck off seriously. Anyone dumb enough to defend that shit is compensating that they really think they're getting better value by buying in bulk when the reality is they're being stiffed by mega corps playing psychological tricks on them
"*[But I make a profit of three and a quarter cents an egg by selling them for four and a quarter cents an egg to the people in Malta I buy them from for seven cents an egg. Of course, I don’t make the profit. The syndicate makes the profit. And everybody has a share](https://norighttobelieve.wordpress.com/2011/06/08/everybody-has-a-share/).*"
What if the yolk to egg white ratio is different when comparing smaller eggs to larger eggs?
Smaller eggs actually taste better. Try pullet eggs some time.
You guys really out here getting angry about the semantics of the egg economy?
The ratio might be different minorly changing price per g, but it's still \*more egg\* and will be more expensive.
Maybe the extremes, but I don't know if that'd apply to the standard size 6/7/8 supermarket eggs.
