I transferred my gas from Globird to Lumo 19-July.   
Got the ''Your Gas transfer is underway" email.  
I sent 4 meter reads to Globird so they could complete the transfer.  
Nothing happened, so I contacted Globird who said it's up to Lumo.

Contacted Lumo about why the transfer hasn't completed and offered to submit a gas read (time/date stamped photo)  
They replied they are waiting for the next scheduled read 19-Sep.  
Globird's last read was 19-Jan.  
I contacted Lumo again and they said I would have to call and arrange a 'special read'.  
Cost $38.

I searched for 'gas meter read victoria' and 'at least once per year' was the info.

I contacted the Energy and Water Ombudsman of Victoria (EWOV) and they replied that gas reads are every 2 months. They wanted the Lumo account number, address, etc. to continue.  
So I am waiting for their response.

I also contacted Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) about changing the 90 days transfer time to 7 days. I'm sure they will side with the gas retailers and say its not possible.

There's no reason it couldn't be 7 days max. Just get a read from the customer.  
  
They delay it because:  
1. Its easier  
2. It doesn't affect them.  
3. The law is on their side.

Gas prices go up 1-Aug, so I thought 19-July would be plenty of time to transfer.


Different in WA, you get change of retailer read on specified date, no faffing about.
VIC, SA, NSW, and qld, you will typically transfer on your next meter read after your 10 business day cooling off period. This would been told to you or a recording played to. In saying that the agent on the phone could have been confused between vic (60 days) and NSW, SA and QLD (90 days) in terms of length of billing cycle.

The distributor needs to provided an end read to the old retail and a start read to the new retailer and unlike the electricity meters in vic these have to be manually read. And the switch won’t happen till the distributor has done the reading.

Lumo have given you an option and you don’t want  to take it the special read.
Ah, WA does it again. How long from start of transfer is that date?
I offered to do a read, which they said they'd let me know, but then the next person has a different answer, and so on, like most customer service.
I used to work for one the retailers recently.

Sadly the script for transferring is stuck in my mind.

A cheeky way you could get around it. Is to cancel your order with lumo and have your partner or house mate “move in” with them. They won’t tell you this because they get paid a commission on sales

You can’t move in as your the registered client with db and there will be a move in reading fee
