
I look foward to seeing this, as a survivor of RoboDebt.


The parasites responsible have still paid no real price. That is what Australia is all about, after all. Corrupt power with impunity.
Good. This is a story that needs to be told.
Kathryn Campbell, who was the secretary of
DHS when robodebt was established: "No, I do not accept that people have died over robodebt."
The whole system needs a massive overhaul. I wouldn't be surprised if people are still offing themselves just by dealing with Centrelink's shitfuckery. People need immediate help when they apply, not eight weeks later.
Can't talk to this book, but if you haven't read the Robodebt RC final report you should at least skim it. It is genuinely interesting (at turns flabbergasting and borderline entertaining) and extremely well-written.
I will never forgive and I will never forget these people were evil people died and yet they responded with I don't accept anyone died from this I don't believe in hell but at times like this I wish it existed for those evil people
There is a sealed chapter within the robodebt report that names six individuals who should face civil action or criminal prosecution. [Source](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/jul/10/not-sustainable-for-robodebt-sealed-chapter-to-be-secret-forever-bill-shorten-says). Five of the six are being investigated by the Australian Public Sector Commission, with the National Anti-Corruption Commission refusing to investigate because five of them are investigated. [Source](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/article/2024/jun/07/robodebt-no-investigation-nacc-corruption-allegations). This is something the labor party sycophants will always scream to defend the nacc. As a result, the sixth person, who will most likely never be investigated, will get off scott free, despite causing and being responsible for so many deaths. The reality is that labor designed it this way. No-one will be held accountable. They are in government and have the power to change this, but won't, and their army of shit eating sycophants will defend this decision. The sixth person is speculated to be scott morrison. The labor party can confirm this by unsealing the chapter, but they won't, and we can expect the shit eating labor sycophants to defend the decision to protect scott morrison, the individual who they constantly screamed and railed against.
which just says she does not see the people who utilise welfare as PEOPLE.
I agree it was totally unacceptable that people killed themselves over Robodebt. Yet they did. RIP.
The system is specifically designed to make poor people kill themselves, and has been since John Howard reformed the whole thing.
Me too!


One of the worst parts is who they targeted: people who worked.


Each and every RoboDebt victim was targeted *because* we were the ones "having a go, giving it a go."


My disability management was f-ed over by this and I still haven't recovered.


And I doubt very much the loved ones of the deceased of RoboDebt have recovered either.


The past Government were bastards for doing this, the present Government are bastards for doing sweet f-all about it!
They were targeted because they were poor. The arsehole who designed robodebt is a happy clapper who honestly believes that god rewards good people with wealth. therefore anyone who is poor is a sinner who deserves to be shat on. Morrison honestly believes that only bad people were punished by robodebt. He honestly believes that every poor person is poor because they do not follow his god.
