This is a curious example of insider trading. 
Calling them school mates makes it sound like they're kids. These guys are nearly 40.
So he only got caught because he used the same betting accounts, lesson learned, tell a different mate each time if you ever know the outcome of something. Fuck the bookies.
Betting agency scumbags shouldn’t be allowed to run markets on things that some people already know the result of.
Nice to know the under resourced police force is dedicating so many resources to help a foreign owned gambling company that made $700m profit last year prosecute 2 people over $13000 over 3 years. 

  
Sportsbet spends more than that on their office masseuse per year.
Oh no gambling companies lost money…. Quick tap phones and make sure the bookies don’t lose anything.

Maybe they should just close bets once the winners are known.
So if betting companies have insider information when setting market pricing is this criminal?
>Young’s lawyer, Stephen Schembri, told the court the father of twins was “extremely remorseful” and could not explain why he did what he did.

Now, I'm not a betting man, but if I was, I'd wager it was something to do with getting easy money.
"School mates"???

>Dale Tristan Young, 39, and James Matthew Dawkins, 38, faced the Dandenong Magistrates Court on Thursday afternoon after they were charged by the Australian Federal Police.

They're nearly 40 years old, they haven't been in school for over 20 years!

WTF is this school mates crap?

If they became friends in school - say that - don't imply that they're still in school aged 38 and 39! Unless, you know, they ARE! And they aren't, they met in school, says the article.

Also, brilliant criminals, easily caught and... who bets on crap like this? And how? Why?

Meh, Australia's betting culture is bonkers - can't we all just stick to Lotto?
If they are printing  stamps with the winner, why wouldn’t you let people bet on it …. They are not match fixing, why set a market if every Kent knows who’s going to win FFS.
Betting like this is so common. Like does anyone wonder how betting companies always accurately predict prerecorded shows every single year. No wonder they now film multiple winners and only announce live on tv.
Why do they have their middle names included like they just killed Abe Lincoln
old boy network
>Prosecutors called on Magistrate Hugh Radford to impose a conviction and good behaviour bond, while both lawyers argued against recording a conviction.

How could this fraud NOT be worthy of a conviction!?

>AFP Detective Superintendent Glenn Todd said the agency was committed to disrupting financial crime using insider information.

>"The misuse of official or privileged information erodes public trust in our institutions,” he said.
“The consequences for those abusing positions of trust can be extremely serious.”

Except in this case, obviously.
That’s the click bait
Dale and Jazza's Day Off
It will appeal to the judges, "they good mates" they need  the special persons treatment to keep them together as good mates with no convictions, no record and a good behavior bond. 

I wonder how it is that lawyers can just call for no conviction to be recorded when the law is implicit with the penalties. Its just nauseating how   the  special people who work in the system break the law and get off scot free. If it was  ordinary people they would be instantly convicted to the maximum of the penalty. I wonder who these two are related or connected too that they getting such special consideration that is so self evident in this court. Maybe Ladbrokes is lobbying on their behalf "don't destroy a good wicket"
Also 100% success rate is a bit suss
100%
Agree. TV show outcomes are also in this category. Can't believe it's legal to bet on known outcomes. I've actually complained about it, got some nothing response.
I’m still shocked that people bet money on WWE hahaha
They should be able to run a market, and people who know the result should be able to clean them out. It's not the general public's job to protect their business.
Why is it even a crime? If bookies want to offer markets on events that have already happened then it’s their problem.
The AFP has the time to chase these guys because they’re doing nothing about robo debt or other corruption.
The cost of investigating and prosecuting this would have exceeded $13000
I also like how news.com.au put both these guys full names (including middle names) in the title of the article to REALLY shame them. The bias for Sportsbet and other advertisers is so damn obvious.
Would it be any better if it was Australian owned?
Careful. You might go to jail for betting on that.
SKOOLM8S4LYF
Because its a victimless crime.
Why do i get the feeling that would be a fucking hilarious movie!
Dictators know this one weird trick when rigging elections. You never have a 100% approval rating.

Law of large numbers means the more you do something, the more you should at least care to know what the average win streak and amount is. 

Fuck the movie Casino had this exact scenario and they used a hammer to solve the problem to great effect.
That's right, you need to have 102% to really legitimise your position of power
I have a 100% success rate on a betting website, because I won one bet and never bet again. Perfectly plausible, just need to only do it once per account/site.
I had a mate who works in the TV industry. He was working on some cooking competition show many years ago and knew the outcome far ahead of the broadcast date. He told me who it was, I looked at a gambling app, that person was available as a selection with pretty good odds. If I had wanted to, I could have bet, but I was sus about the whole situation and didn't.
Must be nice to have so much spare time.


I can't even imagine how you could be mad about this.
Haha, I’m pretty shocked that people can even sit down and watch WWE
By this logic athletes should be allowed to bet on their own games.
it erodes public trust. The public is a victim. 

As one of the public, the legal existence of such a shitty betting company has eroded my trust in public officials way more than these lads. 
How do you figure?
Yeah true, Putin had some of his top brass/oligarchs run in his most recent 'free and democratic elections' just to give the illusion of democracy. Probably as some form of quid pro quo/promotion. 
Yeah, you just add more voters to the pool until you win
takes 5mins to write an email.

looking at your reddit comments you very regularly put more effort into comments than I put into that email, so I'm not sure your comment about spare time makes much sense.
I don't, but it's like sitting down to watch a (very action heavy) play. We all know the outcome is scripted, but the audience doesn't know the outcome.
Up to each sport on whether they think that will corrupt their sport. No reason for the government to get involved in protecting the betting companies though.
The only party thats out of money is a multi million dollar gambling company. No ones life has been negatively impacted
My comments are part of discussions on topics I'm specifically interested in, so of course I put in effort.


Even 5 minutes of yelling into the abyss is 5 minutes too much.
Why should sporting agencies be allowed to make rules on this? There's no reason for them to get involved.
the issue is that it will corrupt the sport, because people bet on their opponents to win and then throw the game.
So you're fine with the abuse of a public office then obviously?
I mean, "big" bets change the odds offered, impacting other punters.

Further, mum and pop owners of these betting companies are impacted.

Further, it cost money for the tax payers to investigate.

Sure, $15k isn't an awful lot... but, the justice system must send the message that this behaviour is unacceptable.
I'm interested in gambling being fair for the participants, and I'm especially interested in my shit not being spoiled because people talk about who is the favourite on betting websites.
The AFL, for example, could (and have) say their players can't bet on AFL games as part of their employment contract. The police and government don't need to jump in to protect the betting agencies. If the betting agencies think they'll lose money they can just not take bets on a particular sport, or refuse to take bets from particular people.
>mum and pop owners of these betting companies are impacted.  

That has got to be one of the funniest things I’ve ever read. 

These are companies that don’t exist to enrich society - they predate upon, and create addicts. The “mom and pops” that you’re so concerned about can end up in financial ruin due to gambling addicts. These companies spend millions upon millions to lure, entice, and trap people in a false positive feedback loop and effectively burn through their paychecks, savings, and sometimes credit. 

I’ve literally never even used one of these stupid platforms, and I’m still yet to go a day without being targeted by their needy ads.
The government can, and has, made rules about how people are allowed to participate in gambling.
That's a different argument.

It's not a victimless crime.

Do the shareholders "deserve" having fraud committed against them is a judgemental question - one I have no interest in commenting on.

But, surely you can accept that I've disproven the terrible argument that it's a victimless crime.
