
More nepotism and money to the same failed groups and organisations will fix this right up
We already have been at the point of paralysis by analysis but the PC report puts a recent official tag on it. 
Not only we’ve spent enough time and resources digging deep for the underlying issues, but also in listening to the community itself for potential solutions. 
Turns out that regardless of the government in charge(so far) we lack the political will and courage to act on the many recommendations that would make almost imminent betterment.
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2024/aug/01/is-there-a-proven-way-to-help-close-the-gap
Which recommendations, specifically, would make things better almost immediately?
I’m non Indigenous so would be hesitant to speak on behalf of the community also, listing all recommendations I’ve seen that I think would make an imminent betterment is a tough ask for a reddit comment. I didn’t mean to say it’s a simple issue to resolve on the contrary it’s complex and multi layered but the point is I am certain all decision making authorities have access to more than enough evidence based, community informed actions to take. 

Imo the essence is acknowledging the disadvantage is inter generational that negatively impact multiple outcomes at once. So a very diluted example is that we can’t expect to get better health outcomes if we don’t try to make the justice system more responsive to specific needs and also address underlying social economic inequities at the same time. This means govt services that collaborate with one another for the same outcomes from different angles and not be tick the box kinda activities just to report about in a few yrs time.

Understand this community must be one of the most inherently resilient and strong groups in human history to be where they are today as a collective and not to have disappeared already. So, empowering the community will have to be the most sustainable way to reach betterment both imminently and long term.
>Imo the essence is acknowledging the disadvantage is inter generational that negatively impact multiple outcomes at once.

Literally every level of government and every single ngo has been doing this for over a decade. Enormous amounts of resources, expertise and time are being spent yearly to drive this home.
  .

> to make the justice system more responsive to specific needs and also address underlying social economic inequities at the same time

Experts and People who actually know what they are talking about have been working on this for many years.

>This means govt services that collaborate with one another for the same outcomes from different angles

Great efforts are made by all government services to do exactly this.  
  
I'm sorry for being direct but I'm taken aback by the arrogance of your comment that you think you know better than every expert working very hard in this sector. And to make such nebulous "suggestions" which are already implemented, when clearly asked to deliver the *specific* changes you claimed were so easy just one comment ago.
Mate, I don’t think you understand what I wrote. I also don’t see why you’d think I’m being arrogant or think that I suggest I know better than anyone or that I said there was an easy solution. 

Also your comment makes me think that you didn’t even read the report before commenting about it. 

I actually wrote in my first comment  that we have enough evidence to know what kind of interventions would work better but lack the will to ‘properly’ implement them. 

You’re somehow getting offended thinking I’m dissing govt programs or ppls efforts- I’m not. It’s quite the opposite, if you don’t critically evaluate the outcomes of initiatives and learn from them to better govt programs, we’ll end up in the same place 10 yrs down the line having wasted more resources and for example wondering why suicide is the leading cause of death for some parts of community in the lucky country…
