
Wait so even before he murdered her, this 64 year old geezer was having a sexual relationship with a 19 year old girl with an intellectual disability?? And he also has a son the same age who'd previously dated her?? That's sketchy as fuck even before the murder bit.
Just when I thought this case couldn’t get any sadder, I read this. Poor Amber deserved so much better. I hope her son is doing ok. I can’t imagine how hard this must be on him.
Poor Amber was failed by the whole community. Red flag after red flag for that disgusting man's behaviour, people had warned the police that she was being abused, nurses had raised their concerns, and fuck all was done. How the hell did it take so long to take this cretin to trial?!
Jesus fucking Christ how horrifying
*Brick Top intensifies*
I really hope those pigs weren’t sent to slaughter for people to eat.

After the [Pickton Farms killer](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-06-01/robert-pickton-dies-in-prison-from-assault-canada/103923016)  You just never know
I hear the best thing to do is feed them to pigs. You got to starve the pigs for a few days, then the sight of a chopped-up body will look like curry to a pisshead. You gotta shave the heads of your victims, and pull the teeth out for the sake of the piggies' digestion. You could do this afterwards, of course, but you don't want to go sievin' through pig shit, now do you? They will go through bone like butter. You need at least sixteen pigs to finish the job in one sitting, so be wary of any man who keeps a pig farm. They will go through a body that weighs 200 pounds in about eight minutes. That means that a single pig can consume two pounds of uncooked flesh every minute. Hence the expression, "as greedy as a pig".
Frank Reynolds was right
Their teeth cut through bones like butter
Just a small correction (not that it really makes it any better). He's 64 now, when this happened 20+ years ago he would have been in his early 40s.
I think the descriptor you are looking for is evil.
At least he can see how much she loved him.
It's honestly baffling. This man seems to have gotten away with murder.... twice?! His ex partner was found tied up in a wheelbarrow with a bag on her head and had been shot in the face. Then two missing school girls were also found on his property another time. 
It’s perplexing.
They needed at least 16 pigs to finish the job then.
get the tea on Errol
Were they Lancashire’s?
No that Turkish, I'm sweet enough
Do you know what "nemesis" means, boy?
Always be wary of any man who keeps a pig farm.
You need at least 16 pigs to do the job.....
How was he charged with the murder of 26 women but they only confirmed 6 victims? Does that mean they have evidence of more victims but haven’t been able to identify the rest?
Bit like a turducken… long pig inside a pig.

Sometimes I should just keep my fucked up thoughts to myself.
I knew that bacon tasted funny.
a body that weighs 200 pounds?? That's a peculiar thing for an Aussie to say.
So curious how you know all this
Thanks, but yeah, you're right, it doesn't make it that much better :S
mid-40s
He'd actually trapped one of those girls in a grain silo for TWO WEEKS. But the charges were dropped. He didn't even deny that he shot his ex in the face, he just claimed it was "accidental". I don't understand how the justice system has let him roam free for all this time. Crimes against women and children clearly don't matter much in this country.
As greedy as a pig
So that's where you keep the sugar
Who the fuck's talking to you, boy?
Yes, because he minced them up and combined them with pork to make Deli meats (I wish I was joking).  

I’m always wary of pork now, even more-so because Australian agriculture has many connections to the Italian Mafia.  I remember pork in Victoria tasting really gamey in the 90’s and didn’t eat it for over a decade because of it.
it made me audibly exhale

....I'll save ya a spot in hell
Movie. Snatch. Watch it.
It’s a movie quote. Snatch.
No worries, I hope that bridge troll of a person will experience the full force of the law.
I'm sweet enough
Jesus Christ
That’s insulting to bridge trolls
That's trolling to insulting bridges
