Hello! My parents are looking to come to Australia in late December for a month and my mother has reduced mobility. She is not in a wheelchair but she really struggles moving around (she has a disability card), so she would really need to fly with minimum comfort.

We are (unsurprisingly) struggling finding flights at a decent price. The budget is in the region of 5,000€ for 2 people. I am looking for any advice or top tip such as best airlines to take, things worth paying for, special services offered by airlines, etc.
I can recommend Finnair Premium Economy for this purpose. Specifically the first row if you can get it. Then transit via Singapore to Hong Kong to a Cathay or Qantas flight the rest of the way. They offer a return ticket for about €3000 on good day.

Reasoning:  
- Sufficient space in the cabin to get in and out of the seat  
- Decent sized bathrooms on their A350 aircraft  
- Helsinki Airport is compact, flat, and easy to navigate  
- Hong Kong or Singapore are also both flat and generally you don't have to go to far from gate to gate. 

Consider:  
- Consider an overnight stop to sleep and have more energy for the next sector. I used to do fly from Brisbane to Northern Finland with my 100 year old grandfather. It made a big difference when he could sleep properly on the way.   
  
Avoid:  
- Doha or Dubai at stopovers can be a real issue if you can't walk briskly. The airports involve a lot of escalators up and down, and if you have a terminal change it's a real hike up and down levels to get where you need to go. Seating is hit and miss as people tend to sleep on the benches. Signage and announcements are hopeless.

Caveat:  
- You are trying to fly to Australia during a peak season. Your budget may be insufficient for even two economy return tickets on a cheap airline. You could easily expect to pay double the price from November to December.
All you can do is check sites like Google Flights and Sky Scanner.  

That said if I’m reading you right you’re suggesting that she needs premium economy at least (if she has mobility issues she morally shouldn’t, and hopefully will not be allowed, to be seated in an emergency exit row - emergencies are unlikely but no one needs someone with mobility issues blocking an exit in case of emergency) - and you should easily be able to find PE flights for the equivalent of AU$8k
Don't forget that airports and airlines usually offer assistance in getting around the airports, terminals, security, and customs.

I made good use of this, having massively underestimating my walking ability on my current Australia visit - from Georgia (US) to Canberra. I have severe osteoarthritis in both knees, and really needed a walker for any sort of distance waking, but decided to go cane-only.  

Some airports had excellent systems in place (LAX), but even the "worst" was very helpful (Nadi). It definitely sped up security and customs checks in my case. 

I am sure this part of the travel should be good, but don't forget to have them request assistance early and often, to have things ready if possible at every step. 

  
I did use Google Flights and SkyScanner, as well as others, to find flights and dates, but to be honest, these can give you ideas of which airline to choose,and which days are more affordable, but the better prices can come directly from their individual websites. And possibly see if any airlines are not listed by the flight websites. In my case, I discovered that Southwest flights are not found in any of these, and I did save a significant amount by this, as well as getting my overseas legs directly from the airline (Fiji in this case).
I'm an Australian with mobility issues and have found that the middle eastern airlines like Emirates and Qatar have been the most comfortable seat-wise and also offer incredible mobility assistance during stopovers. In Doha, we were met at the plane and my husband and I were whisked around in a golf cart and let into the business lounge. Staff then came back to fetch us and take us to our next flight.
UK disability card (parking) is honoured here in Australia. 

Rent an electic scooter.  you can get fairly small ones that pack small
I would suggest she gets her pilots license and then co-pilots the plane.
