Nominate your neighbour, your car, the weather or your broken trampoline springs. Tell us about any non-political thing in your life that's shitty and have a vent.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
iiNet have debited me for a new NBN service now they can't find the charge and are asking dumb questions like what is the account number. 

Well since there was no reference number on the bank debit I had to send a copy of the charge, they still can't find it, so have been asked for partial CC number. 

In the meantime, every interaction triggers a customer feedback survey. I've had three so far. 

Since I'm stuck in limbo waiting for a connection I'd say feedback is fuck you iiNet.
Literally just had my first panic attack in 7 years at the optomotrists. I'm still reeling. She was just so aggressive in asking questions and didn't really let me answer or listen to my answers at all. It felt like she was angry with me that my eyes had been feeling weird and i couldnt describe it quickly enough for her. She wouldn't give me back my glasses and she wouldn't give me a change to deescalate myself or process. I could not have made my needs any clearer to her- i just needed like a miniute of her not asking questions to do some breathing exercise- and she then said "ok, so you're a difficult patient." As if she hadn't just been *at* me the whole time sayimg she didn't understand what i was saying- well if you dintumderstand allow me to actually answer your questions! And then listen to those answers! 

I let the rooms and asked to be booked in with someone different as our personalities werent well match and she came out and stated going on about how how I  needed to calm down and that I had anxiety. IVE BEEN FUCKING TRYING TO CALM DOWN IVE BEEN ASKING YOU TO LET ME ffs. After the lady at the front desk said she should go back and i had made the new appointment she comes out AGAIN. Like come the fuck on. I was doing my best to be kind about this and say it's not her fault at all and stop bloody crying but she just couldn't stop herself. I could not have made my needs clearer. I was polite but i was so direct and upfront about what was going on and what i needed. I do not understand how this escalated as much as it did.
Just went to the barber. They said $60 then because i asked for a style cut it was $70, then because they used scissors it was $75. Then at the end when i went to pay they put the tip screen on the eftpos to try make me guilt tip. 

Guy did a good job and all, i was happy but sheesh its rough out there.
Viruses. Have woken with a sore throat and I got a busy weekend ahead!
Seriously why can't people just understand there are not enough mechanics to go around. No, ringing EVERY fucking mechanic in town asking them to service your shit that's already 10,000km overdue tomorrow will not magically create a spot for you. Plan it out and wait your god-damned turn.
Another one for the day - I saw this bit of 'editorialising' on a TimeOut article posted to FB:  
"The birth rate in Sydney hasn't been this low since 2006 – and *cozzie livs* is to blame"  
What the hell language is that?
It's still way too cold in Sydney.
All the vapers at 6am on the platform of Rhodes Station; fuck you all.
So I crossed at the lights near my place and if I press the button it produces a red arrow for the left turning cars but the rest can proceed straight. However there is only a single lane so the majority gets stuck behind the left turning car until the arrow goes off after about 10-15 seconds.  A tradie had pulled forward to the corner, waiting because of the arrow.  Dickhead in an Audi behind him blasts his horn until the ute goes through the red arrow a couple of seconds early.  Not content with that the Audi wanker leans on his horn as he blasts on through the intersection.
What. A. Kent. I'm so sorry you went though this today
I’m so sorry this happened to you! I hope you were able to deescalate, and get a decent optometrist.
yeah that's nuts, I live in a major city and manage to get my haircut for $40 and they do a top job. Time to find a different place I think (apologies if finding a cheaper place is not possible wherever you live)
Thanks. The real shame is that I've had her before and i thought she was nice. I'm hoping this is just a bad day and not that the version I've seen before was a random good day
Thank you. I managed to get another appointment with a different optomotrist this afternoon who was lovely. Everyone else there are angles its just this one lady
That does suck. I get it, I've been there. When Drs or medical personnel are rude to me, I really struggle to trust them going forward. I know everyone has off days but not allowing you to calm down when you felt a panic attack coming on is insane. Actually insane. I think you handled it well. Defs see someone else if that's what you feel is best for you. Stick to your boundaries and do you
She literally came out to continue it (or try to fix it) twice despite the front desk lady telling her to fuck off. SMH. 

I was able to see the other optometrist this after noon and he was great so, a lot emotionally but not much time lost on getting new glasses. yay.
Seriously so insane. Who follows someone and keeps going at it? What an ego. 

I hope you're able to chill and feel settled this evening or this weekend. Watch a fave show or eat something you like or light a cute candle 🌷
