Seriously,i want to know

Why it costs 80 Million to extend a road  just 190m in this country for example


The fucking DUTCH just installed a 3 lane bridge,in 3 days Over a highway..for 29 Million Euro..

japan was able to replace over 560Metres of major roadworks damaged from a quake   for less than 100

Like i get there are rorts,but it's insane the cost of some of the road project's im seeing like the mamre road improvements in western sydney.
Check your sources for these cost claims. I suspect you're not comparing like for like.
Let's also talk about the insane amount of time taken to get anything done.

An intersection near me was remodelled.

* Road divider excavated
* Built one extra right turn lane
* new concrete divider added
* resurfaced and all lanes for about 200m back remarked

It took 18 months.
Look I've got no fuckin clue right but is the road in Australia in bumfuck nowhere vs the middle of Europe?
Now have a look at the cost of rail projects.  And how much they have increased in the past 25 years. Way, way more than the rate of inflation.  I'm sure there are reasons.
- Environmental impact study
- Cultural study because it has native trees on it
- Public outreach
- Tribunal and redesign because someone objected
- International 10 person fact finding mission (flying first class to Paris of course) 
- 17 individual feasibility studies, each taking one year
- Unionised workers in $150k who won’t work in the rain, if it’s sunny and only during peak hours
- Steel and building materials that were ethically sourced 

It’s a joke. Was in China last week watching them build roads and overpasses outside my hotel window. They did more in one night than what would be done in a month in Aus. 

It’s all money laundering
I wonder how much the Dutch paid their migrant workers from various poorer European countries
Contruction companies are competing for contracts against all of Europe vs an island nation
Probably the main factors are;

- Wages. We pay a very good wage to our construction workers. (I believe this is good, but will save that discussion for another time).
This is a big factor in increased cost.

- Construction materials/workers/engineering experts are at a premium right now. Victoria is the biggest culprit, but across the country there is an unprecedented level of major projects making the pool of workers (or suppliers of materials) very powerful when bargaining their labour/goods. (Good for them I say).

- CFMEU corruption as recently detailed in The Age. Undoubtedly having an impact.

- In terms of time a big factor is OT/dangerous work pay/overnight penalties are very expensive. So often it is cheaper to go longer, wait for dangerous conditions to end, then it is to pay people to work through it.

I am sure there are other factors too. Things like pre-work investigations and stakeholder discussions can also take a long time. There are cultural and heritage plans required, environmental plans etc.
Corruption & Price gouging. 

Our silent epidemic.
We are heavily regulated but also it really depends on the surface a recent example I have. We got a quote to use “hot mix” a thick bed of hot bitumen that is laid  and then compacted for 100m of driveway price including road base was $40k same driveway but going 200 meters with the same road base but a two coat spray seal ( lay the blue metal and spray on hot bitumen ) $16k. We expect the spray seal to fail sooner than the hot mix would. Most roads around us are spray seal but highways tend to be hot mix.
Corruption, insane cost of materials thanks to the Australia tax, huge numbers of extremely well paid people employed on projects that are superfluous when you actually think about it & super high tradie wages.. take your pick!
The price and time to build roads is expensive here compared to Europe because of a few factors. Most main roads in Europe were built 2000 years ago by the Romans, and have simply been getting upgraded since. They did the hard work, levelling the land and not having to weave around houses and geography. They have slave workers to simply pull down hills and fill valleys. Our roads need to be weaved around every obstacle.


European roads mostly have mild temperatures and water erosion to deal with. Our roads have to deal with strong seasonal rains and scorching heat at the same time. This means a phenomenal amount of engineering of substrates and layering materials needs to be done to deal with this. Take a sodden road, and then cook it. Expansion and contraction, and then add 20 loaded trucks compacting it all down. The abuse our roads take is incredible, so need to be built incredibly well. This takes time and money. 
Why are Australian tradies so overpriced?

Lack of effective competition & rent seeking.

Nationalisation of construction capability, with contractors only for the peaks and troughs would improve matters - but that would require an actual left wing government.
High wage to workers and engineer, cost of materials and transport, and I assume lots of paper work and extra steps for safety.
CFMEU gotta take their cut
Washington State here, generally it’s around $1000.00 per foot for the easy ones—Bridges and such cost more—
Check out the Epping Bridge project in NSW. $220m (and obviously it will end up being a lot more!) to add one extra lane to a small bridge. It's absolute lunacy!
Bikies
5 letters... CFMEU!!
It's unions. And stop go people. 

I've never seen so many stop go people anywhere in the world as on Australian road works. 

They are there because the legislation says they are needed to prevent accidents. Probably 20% of the time they are actually needed and 80% of the time it's a waste.

Go to Asia and see how many stop go people there are. There ain't none.
[deleted]
I've been watching some major road construction projects near my place and it's just staggering how long they spend:

1) Moving dirt back and forth.  Just do it once for fuck sake.

2) Building a temporary road to divert the traffic, then half building a modified version of the new road, then rebuilding the diversion, then half building other parts of the new road, then rebuilding the diversion again to finally resurface all of the new parts again.  I feel like there's three or four steps too many.

3) Just fucking around for ages.  Literally one plain intersection has been closed for a year and residents detoured a good 2km around it.  It seems like it should have been reopened 3 months ago but they are still fucking with it.

Someone is making an absolute killing on these projects all at the taxpayers expense.
I reckon I know 😂 it’s the 500 odd council workers they have erecting signs and shaking their lollipops. I just feel bad for the 501st bloke…yeah he’s the only dude you ever see actually working but I suspect they rotate every few minutes. Shit ya not that’s where our cash goes and why nothing gets done anymore 🤷‍♂️
Because the government  and the unions Here are taking the piss mate. That's all. It's not  sustainable wait another 10 months might be changing, the unions are in the shit right now.
Contractors waste a hell of a lot of money doing dumb shit on many road projects here that cause more work than it should. Source: being a subcontractor to one of those contractors.
People need a better understanding of soil and foundation engineering. There is so many variables for cost.

I know for example there used to be round about outside uq that uw got the council to quote to change to traffic lights as uq land and roads is actually private. They were quota something like 30 million and then went private contract for something like 5 million. So there is definitely inefficiency at government level.
I feel like we are neighbours lol
yeah it took then 11 weeks to install a zebra crossing here

wtf
As PM who has worked for government, 18 months is lightning fast, lol. There are a tonne of stakeholders a minimum review periods etc that all bog things down. Anything that requires coordination between local and state authorities (and their third party contractors) will blow out in terms of time. It's a fucking nightmare. I had to try and turn on a set of traffic lights once at it took over 12 months. Ridiculous.
Standing up a new project and contract management team every time and not having a smooth long term plan for builds is going to be 2 huge issues.

Yep let's just let everyone go instead of having a good long term authorised list of projects to flow through.
Yes, and the reasons are pretty obvious.

1. Land has gone up faster than inflation.
2. We have more stringent safety standards.
Roads, tollways, tunnels and  hospitals.  

Just look at the costs of building a state of the art  hospital in the USA  and Europe and you wonder how they get away with the daylight robbery prices for lesser build here in Australia like everything is being gold plated. 

These thieves don't do this price gouging in the Middle East which has money for gold plated infrastructure. I guess they know and don't want to spend 20 years in jail! In Australia they get a pat on  the back and congratulations from the politicians for ripping off taxpayers.

The worst rip offs is local council and Vic Roads projects here in Victoria. They widen an already established road. When you look at it and then see  what  they do. It amounts to bulldozing  to widen the road, new road base and sand down along with the bitumen and  white line marking. Then these pissy bits of road cost between 5 and 10 million dollars  and take 6 months to widen less than 1km of road.  

 Then they do this con job widening of  1 kilometre strips road every few years rather  that just doing the whole road with 2 or 3 lanes. Its like  a planned  staged price rip off  that is planed over years. The rip off and incompetence is palpable and with no accountability or  tender documents that anyone can access. In the USA and Canada all  government tenders are recorded on a open public web page where you can view the cost breakdowns. Why would our  corrupt politicians want transparency for their mates?
You forgot the local business within 30km and aboriginal and indigenous businesses criteria
NIMBYism is also not a thing in China. Since citizens don’t/can’t own any private land. 

If the Chinese government wants to take away your home to build a new highway or HSR line, they can and will.
If your driveway is just for cars, a spray sealed surface should last pretty well. If you've got heavy trucks on it, then not so much.
Not just that but even just materials for projects are harder to get when we import so much
i mean probably not a real excuse though.

switzerlan built a road through a mountian,has a same if not higher cost of labour than us,but can do it for quarter the cost here
Spoken like someone that has never done a day of construction in their life
Mate, tell us you know nothing about road construction without telling us you know nothing  about roads.

There’s an interesting YouTube video about why the dirt gets moved so much for roads, channel is called practical engineering you learn something.
Councils don't run road crews, and haven't since the 90s, at least in Victoria. All got outsourced a long time ago.
Is there any context to these prices that could change the cost between countries? 

You - NO! It’s the unions!!!!! 

Glad to see people still eating up nonsense, with you not even being Australian I look forward to your insight 😂
At government level, competent contract managers -particularly ones with industry-specific knowledge - invariably either get promoted out of contact with day-to-day contract management, or get lured into the private sector by better pay. 

The government is outgunned in this respect. 

Also, there’s a general view amongst the private sector that the government is a bottomless pit of cash. 

Finally, Governments are bound by a slew of codes of conduct, model litigant provisions and the like. People would very rapidly become upset if Governments *actually* flexed their muscles in contracting - working for the Government would be *terrifying* if not for those provisions. 

In the few areas (the PBS, legal work) where the Government actually decides to take a hard line, contractors basically are in a “take it or get soundly fucked” situation.
People need a better understanding of apathetic government contract managers and widespread corruption within the procurement management capabilities across all levels of government in Australia.
Did it have 11 lines? Pretty standard if so. Must've gotten lucky to not have any rain days, takes an extra week for the road to dry. /S

But yeah I agree with you, it's hard seeing big projects overseas and comparing what we get here
I feel for you. I'm just picturing Gantt charts with tasks stretching off into oblivion.
Please accept my formal apology.

It shall be made right with a traditional smoking ceremony or two. 

https://www.news.com.au/technology/motoring/on-the-road/dispute-between-traditional-owners-over-smoking-ceremony-delays-perth-freeway-ribbon-cutting/news-story/d7a7db164e7d3f18f3a172014d2d0fdf
You are very much correct, the highway will still get built for the greater good, but not everyone gives in and moves out! 
Construction does not get delayed with 5 years of court proceedings!

https://youtu.be/tNNMNLU2GDU
It is crazy steep so cars need to keep moving or they struggle to take off if they stop.
And that is still cheaper than making them here - we are a wearily country with high wages.
Did they use their own labor - or you know have access to 100's and 100's of million other workers from the same continent prob 1/3rd of what we pay ?
Yeah what a crock of shit. Its 5 workers to stand a round and watch, not 4, he forgot the man leaning on the shovel
Sure, I know nothing about road construction.

I do know about order of execution on complex projects.  The rework / rediversion just seems absurd and inefficient.
Yeah that makes a lot of sense. Guess they just stick twice the number of workers on every job then shove out a hand to take our cash. Ahh that explains why you can get 100K twirling the old lollipop for sure 🤔🤷‍♂️
Sadly there are a lot of Australians who would probably agree with them. It's very concerning how widespread anti-union sentiment is becoming in Australia again.
What about productivity rates then? 
That's  Dave. The job wouldn't  get done  without him.
