
Zac Stubblety-Cook is a rhythmically satisfying name.
Watching the 4 x 200 relay. Lani Pallister who is currently positive started strong but faded badly in the back 100, not surprisingly she ditched the 1500.

Its a slippery slope, you train so hard for the opportunity to perform at the Olympics, but you absolutely should not be exerting that effort on your body when you have Covid.

Later on if any of these athletes claim they're feeling garbage or unable to perform the way they once did it instantly goes to blaming vaccines.
Am I missing something here? Isn't this irresponsible to run the risk of spreading COVID to others at the Olympics and effecting their performances, whether Australian or other nationality?
I don't understand why elite athletes aren't more worried about doing long term damage to their bodies. I've only had it once and once was enough for me - the vertigo and the sudden blood pressure drops when I change position too fast (like sitting to standing) are fucking awful.
Antiviral performance enhancers?
I was watching the beach volleyball last night and the Ch9 commentator mentioned how a 'flu' had been making its way around the village and some people are sick or under performing. Its covid, why say its a flu?

And a few days ago when interviewing the Mum of an athlete, the Mum mentioned covid and the 'journo' cut her off immediately, a terrified look on her face (how dare the C word be mentioned) and Ch9 cut away from the interview.

What is with the media minimising Covid so much? No wonder Australia has massive excess deaths and a falling life expectancy.

Edit: Last night the presenter mentioned the C word. I wonder if the Ch9 trolls have been reading the sub?
Zac Stubblety-Crook :(
It's wild that these athletes are competing with covid, like isn't it really dangerous for your body considering the impact of covid?

It's even more wild in this case they're pulling silvers.
That is a satirical made-up name, to make fun of posh English people, surely?
If Dickens was looking for a character name…
I do wonder what his nickname at school was...
But he pronounced with an extra syllable and I can’t tell if it scratches my brain or if it throws off the rhythm
Rolls off the tongue like a bag of square rolling pins.
Wait, people are competing while positive?!
It is irresponsible. Pandora is out of the box, unfortunately, since the world decided to live with covid. The article mentions that the team is masking in crowded places, among other precautions. 

More worrying than someone's olympic performance being affected is their long-term health overall.
I believe the AOC has strict monitoring and guidelines. When Lani Pallister got it she was isolated and only out for competition. Tested regularly. Wore a mask at all times and kept away from competing nations. 

The sad reality is that it exists now and with vaccination around, you can't keep locking down everyone, but you can reduce the risk.
It’s irresponsible to not give it to the US and GB Teams… and maybe the Kiwis for good luck. 

/s
Not really. The strains of Covid in 2024 are very different to 2021, and these athletes would be up to date on their vaccinations.
I've luckily never had it, but I've already lived with those issues for over a decade now. Really not looking forward to eventually getting it and having those problems exacerbated.
They don’t care about long term damage. They need to be fit til about 35 at most. After that, they’ll deal
Plenty of athletes don't care about their long term health. Boxers don't. All the ones who take PED's don't. And that list would be huge
Elite athletes are already doing long term damage to their bodies with the amount they train. Exercise is healthy. At elite level it’s a stress on the body and immune system.
People that are peak fitness very rarely have issues with covid.
Hmmm...interesting take on the issue.
> What is with the media minimising Covid so much?

Because if it were made apparent, people might start to question how something that's supposedly "over" is still so readily apparent, and why there's people actively spreading it live on TV. They have to uphold the notion that COVID is a thing of the past, anything that threatens to remind people that our governments collectively decided to sweep it under the rug because they value profit over our lives is a serious threat.
They probably don’t want to bring attention to covid circulating amongst athletes because the games might get forced to cancel or postpone events. I bet they’ve been told not to mention covid so that everything can continue as planned.
>What is with the media minimising Covid so much?

I guess it's better for Channel 9 viewers to live in denial.
Unless you want to live in your own personal bubble, the cats out of the bag. Covid is going around like any other common cold and there’s no escape. 
They must be really good athletes, performing while feeling terrible. I don't know how they do it. Covid wrecked me and the wisest thing that I did was to politely  ignore my doctor and find a clinic that issues Anti-viral drugs. I really don't understand why so many Doctors have apathy towards the effectiveness of the anti-viral drugs when it comes to treating covid.
Spoiler for you mate. Covid is not a big deal for people who are fit and healthy.
Stubby
Two Dads?
StubbyCookerzzzz
She tested negative on the day. Competed in the heats and final, but still kept wearing a mask despite her two negative tests.
Ye they mentioned it during the swimming coverage the other night. Nuts right?
Yes, they're idiots. They are also taking paxlovid, the anti-viral that us mere mortals in Australia cannot access (unless elderly or immunocompromised), so they think they're 'safe'. Disgusting behaviour really.
What was the world supposed to do?

Edit: the fucking hypochondriacs in this thread 🙄
Yeah, I already had POTS (and dysautonomia and EDS) before I got sick but it's all been exacerbated now ☹️
Do fit people not have epithelial cells?
Elite athletes age faster and often have serious health issues when older. Have you ever seen an elite athlete in their 50s? Human beings aren’t supposed to be that fit.
Yep, exactly!  
  
I read this interview recently; "At the current rate of infection, *most Americans may* grapple with some form of Long *Covid*." ... So guess that means Australian's too. Fun times ahead when all the workforce is chronically ill.

[https://www.ineteconomics.org/perspectives/blog/debilitating-a-generation-expert-warns-that-long-covid-may-eventually-affect-most-americans](https://www.ineteconomics.org/perspectives/blog/debilitating-a-generation-expert-warns-that-long-covid-may-eventually-affect-most-americans)
Except literally nothing that you said actually responded to what the other person said, beyond the fact that they're competing. There absolutely is an escape, it's just people like yourself who are too selfish to do literally anything to help it.
You're fit and healthy until you arent.
I think the concern is more for Long Covid. I admittedly don't know if heaps of studies have been done on the rates in previously healthy people yet (someone feel free to swoop in on that one), but developing that could be career-ending
It was found this year that covid causes stomach cancer. Quite a few viruses cause cancer (HPV for example) and it looks like covid is another of them.
They just have to watch out for 5G towers, amirite?
I think it's crazy that all the competitors aren't wearing masks all the time for their own protection
lol. Are you in a Time Machine from 2019?
Continue taking precautionary measures, wear masks, social distance, install proper ventilation in public enclosed spaces, stop forcing yourself into the office when you're sick, etc...

There was a million and one things the world could have done, actively pretending that COVID had gone away was basically the worst of them.
Yeah long covid / covid related health issues can hit you no matter how fit and healthy you are. This is a good summary article; [https://theconversation.com/long-covid-puzzle-pieces-are-falling-into-place-the-picture-is-unsettling-233759](https://theconversation.com/long-covid-puzzle-pieces-are-falling-into-place-the-picture-is-unsettling-233759)

And this is a more terrifying picture of how it can linger in your body; [https://news.scihb.com/2024/07/covids-hidden-toll-full-body-scans.html](https://news.scihb.com/2024/07/covids-hidden-toll-full-body-scans.html)
Nah, have an auto-immune disease triggered by covid
Everyone can still do those things...
And people don't, because they'd much rather selfishly pretend that we aren't literally in a pandemic still, you're the one that asked what the world was supposed to do.
No-one is pretending? COVID is not the same as it was in 2020. The majority of the world is vaccinated, it's time to move on. Those that want to take precautionary measures are welcome to do so.

I thought you might have offered something more insightful than taking precautions (that many continue to do), but alas, it's just parroting the same shit.
