
>Australia has the highest rates of childhood food allergies in the world, with peanut allergies alone affecting about three in every 100 children by one year of age.
>
>It can create anxiety for the child and caregivers, as the risk of a life-threatening allergic reaction (known as anaphylaxis) makes it critical to avoid the allergen or ensure quick treatment.
>
>On Wednesday, the federal government announced it is funding a nationwide treatment program called Adapt that will see babies under 12 months with peanut allergies fed daily doses of peanut powder. Advice for carers of children with food allergies is to avoid the allergen completely.
>
>The babies in the program will be carefully monitored by allergists and researchers emphasise exposure therapy must not be attempted if children are not participating in the trial.
Yea there's been some solid research for a while you can essentially 'build up tolerance' at a young age when it comes to peanut allergies.

Pretty cool discovery.

Dangerous though cause a lot of parents trying to replicate this may not understand the scientific nuances of building up tolerance bit by bit when trying to replicate it themselves in reality...
This is great! I knew someone whose teenage son was in such a program about 6 years ago and was having positive results with the treatment.
I had a childhood friend who died when she was 21 from anaphylaxis after eating a curry that had peanuts in it.  She had three epi pens with her, all three were used, but she died anyway, in her brother's home.

I salute anything to prevent that from happening to another person.
We took part in the initial study 12 years ago and used egg powder on babies with a family history of asthma.
Do they take 25 year old babies with peanut allergies?

Asking for a friend…
We’re doing this right now with our son. 1/4 teaspoon of peanuts every night. It’s working
I don't remember any kid having a peanut allergy when I was at school.  WTF happened?
When my children were babies, back in the 70s and early 80s the word was to breast feed exclusively until they were 6 months. I did that with my first and my second for about 5 months when he made it quite obvious he wanted solid food. Luckily neither developed food allergies. 

My DIL introduced limited solids at about 4 months, like a piece of apple in muslin to suck on, or a bone with scraps of meat to gnaw. 

Looking back I think her way was the best because the baby got a variety of food very early when their immune system was primed to accept it. The trick is to keep up the milk so they also get plenty of calories and nutrients from that as well.
I mean yes that's usually how things work. You experiment on a live subject.
Maybe don't report on this in the media as I can see so many idiots trying this at home without the appropriate safety and monitoring...
> three in every hundred

If only there was a better way to represent this!
There's also been research with older children and adults (I know someone who participated in one trial as a late teen). Apparently in that case it's much less effective than starting desensitisation/immunotherapy treatment very young - generally the older someone is the less dramatic the result, and the greater the likelihood that ongoing desensitisation is required to maintain tolerance rather than achieving a complete remission.

It's definitely interesting stuff...
I had a similar treatment program for grass allergies. I live in rural area and my skin and body would go nuts  because of certain pollens. I had the allergy tests then got   controlled dose injections over 8 months every week while the doses  were stepped up. It worked a treat and now I am immune and dont get pollen induced hay fever and rashes anymore.

I understand that the peanut allergy is more severe and people can die from it  so they have to be ultra cautious. However the technique does work.

 I am not sure if it they have treatments like this for shellfish allergies. One of my kids is allergic to prawns  and  I have been pushing her to investigate these dosing therapies like I had done my pollen allergy. What a miserable life it would be not being able to eat prawns and other shellfish.
Reminds me of the toadstool taster guy.
This can be done with lots of allergens, even later in life.  You may not be able to eat peanuts freely, but you won’t have to worry about dying from being in the same room as someone eating them
I read something recently that the old smear a bit of peanut butter on their wrist trick can actually create an allergy that didn’t exist and that the best way to develop tolerance is through your gut.
My nephew has been doing something similar for years and its not entirely resolved the allergy but its reduced his sensitivity and reactions to stuff massively
I participated in the PrEggNut study while pregnant and during the early infancy of my son in 2021-2022. A great and worthwhile study!
There are already peanut powder capsules for adults that Drs prescribe.  Ask your Dr for a referral to an immunologist.  I'm not 100% sure but I think it maybe covered by Medicare, or some of it anyway.
In the 90s people got scared, so mums stopped eating peanuts while pregnant, and stopped feeding peanuts to their children. Hey presto, a generation of kids with an allergy to peanuts.
There's two theories on why and it may be a bit of both. One is the idea that people keep their houses and kids too clean. Kids born ceasearen, without pets in the household and without older siblings are more likely to have allergies. Probably exposing our guts to diverse microbes early on helps our gut immune system develop properly and protects against allergies.

Also introducing babies to a wide range of foods in the first year seems to lower the risk of food allergies. We've probably been feeding babies more processed baby food and less adult food in the past few decades.
Because in the old days you feed babies everything and anything they could handle without choking and liked the taste of.  Peanuts, almonds, pistachios, walnuts, cashews, brazils, everything. Nothing was off limits.
What changed in the 90s was the mums stopped eating peanuts, so there was no trace of them in the placenta blood or breast milk.
They've done heaps of research - that's why they are rolling it out. 

In any case, how would you expect something like this to be tested if it isn't on a live subject? Testing for allergies on dead people is usually a waste of time.
Yep, that was old way and worked pretty well for the first few thousand years. 

You gave the baby a taste of the food you were eating. If they liked it and could handle it without choking, away you went.
Lol no it isn't. The vast majority of human medical research is done on lab benches, with cells or with mice. Only a small fraction of research is done in human subjects.
How about we just don't show anything on the news in case it gives anyone ideas.

FFS, it's amazing how people can just find fault with everything no matter how positive it is. Just be happy about what these researchers have been able to accomplish.
Not using percentages in articles is a pet peeve of mine. 

Like seriously, if we’re reading an article then we went to school, we all understand percentages.
That's such a great name for the program!
Yes! It was great to be able to help. Love the name!!
Oh fr? Would love to get rid of this allergy. I developed it as a teenager and I loved peanuts and peanut butter as a kid.
So write an article once the research is completed and they have actual advice for parents and doctors with the general population.
You should look into it, I don't know if they can cure a peanut allergy yet but I think they can decrease the severity of the reaction.  I am looking at seeing an allergist over my reaction to bee venom, I think it takes a few years to overcome but I'm glad it's not a food allergy.

Best of luck to you 🥜🐝
They've done lots of research which is why they are now rolling it out. It's never going to be a "DIY" thing for parents to take on - the risks are too high.
