
Isnt there a 6 year statute of limitations ?   Or does that not apply to government?
My mum tells me that after my dad died in 1981 she opened the glovebox and it was full of parking tickets and minor traffic violations.  I hope I don't have to pay all these for her.
Meanwhile they give money to Rupert….
Victoria is doing this currently. Fines Vic are also suspending licenses.
I wonder what fraction of that is charges imposed by Linkt, the dodgy private toll-road company that uses government enforcement to collect their arbitrary, made-up debt.
I worry I might have a sper debt but I've never recieved anything. Anyway I can find out? I had 2 or 3 parking fines from years ago, lost all the details but those unpaid fines haunt my dreams.
No. SPER will find you eventually and one way or another you'll pay with money or your time. 

If you're bored:

[https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/view/pdf/2024-02-01/act-1999-070](https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/view/pdf/2024-02-01/act-1999-070)
Is there any limitations when it comes to the government and "fuck you, pay us"?
If the vehicle was in your dads name or you can show it was your dad who was driving then they cannot hold you responsible just because the person is passed.

They will just write them off as the person who received the fines has passed
Suspending licences for SPER debts has been a thing for at least 10+ years.
Doubt it would be a SPER debt. Assuming they are council/private parking “tickets” then they can’t go to SPER. You can always just call and ask. Would be able to find the number on their website.

Nothing saying the council/car park owner don’t sell the debt to a debt collector though. SPER is only for government generated fines.
Thank you.   I wasn't aware that there was no limitation period.   But I am aware that fines are not admissible in bankruptcy, so that won't avoid them either...
Apparently they did ask her to pay in the 80s.  She told them to send the bill to him.
Council fines can and do go to SPER
No worries.
https://i.chzbgr.com/full/9065734912/h58EBD31F/top-guess-lll-die
interesting, is your mum still around as maybe they could hold her accountable if the car was in her name, but they certainly can’t hold you accountable if you didn’t have your licence at the time ect,

They would have to prove to some capacity that the person who they are charging is the person that was responsible for the offence not just a family member they can pin it on
