can i park in my RSLs chairman’s spot? 

love a bit of small town drama 

There has been a back in forth of who owned my local RSLs carpark, as it was in dire condition. RSL said they were quoted 1m for repairs, but said it was leased from the council. Whispers on the town are that part of the lease included maintenance.

Anyway, RSL has mysteriously gotten a brand new car park, with the RSL posting on social media saying that it is council “boat ramp work” , now the community is kicking off because the boat ramp isn’t any different. 

Now yesterday someone took to facebook, asking for transparency. 

I assume - as a joke, they asked if the land is council owned, could they then park in the spot “allocated” for the chairman. The actual chairman swiftly responds to say that the space is owned by the RSL. Someone comes back with a picture of the Council works, having actually repaired said spot. The chairman did not respond when asked if the council had repaired private land.

So reddit, can i park in it? 
Hmm. Park in it. See if you get a ticket from the Council. 

If you do, then go from there. It will indicate whether the Council claims it as Council land or not.

The price of the ticket should be worth the entertainment.
Nambucca, yeah?
Freedom of information request on the maintenance and whatever deals are done for the lease of public land. Or just ask your local councillor for a please explain.

Edit: typo
yes
If the car park is leased by the RSL, it will be theirs allocate use right? If the council owns it and restores it to a usable condition, isn't that just part of "landlord" duty? Am I missing something as to why one can then decide to enter a restricted parking spot? Please fill in the gaps as I can't work out why people think they can.
You probably can, but also remember the RSL can choose to cancel your RSL membership (if you have one).
Classic small town drama is the best. Bet a bit of pressure got applied due to upcoming council elections.
If he can park in your spot, you can park in his.
Sounds like a dodgy deal.
If you use six maps, you can view lot boundary and labels. Using this information you can get the pot number, googling, that often reveals all the secrets.
Order a skip and put it in his parking spot.  Bill it to the RSL.  Case closed.
Just buy the same car in the same colour as the chairman. Long as you're not their at the same time as him no one will notice
Do it lmao
Sure you can. but you can also most likely get your car towed or fined (if it is a council car park), or your membership at the rissole revoked if it isn't.
The issue of ownership seems moot 

1. If its council owned/policed  then the sign is no patking, rsl director excepted.. so they can fine u

2. If its private, they can tell you leave and if you don't, or you do but come back, they call allege it is trespassing,or even failure to leave licensed premises ?.
I’d chuck in $5 if OP got a ticket
Spot on! have you been following along?
Amazed I had to scroll for so long to find the correct answer.
it’s just a bit weird that it has been called boat ramp works, and the chairman person said the car park is directly owned by the rsl, but has been repaired in the “boat ramp works” just smells weird i guess but i know jack about councils and leases
Same.
Me too
Just park your boat there
Without anyone showing title deeds or contracts, it's all just speculation. Maybe the car park was thrown in with the boat works for efficiency if they're both council projects. Perhaps someone ought to get an FOI or get the state involved if they're worried about some form of shady dealings.



But I don't get why people would think of parking on a reserved spot makes any sense whatever the situation.
Sounds like something the Chairman of the Nambucca RSL would say to stop people parking where he wants to park
The concept of reserved seems to escape you. If it isn't appropriate, perhaps the RSL can be persuaded to turn it into a regular spot.
Any idiot can put up a "reserved" sign. If they don't own the spot, putting up the sign is meaningless.
If it's leased, then they own it. If it isn't, then they don't. No clarity as to the situation here so it appears to be just a lot of gossip. Filthy behaviour from everyone.
