They keep asking you to select different options, but irrespective which option you select they end with "we expect high volume of call and thus hanging up on you".  And I started calling at 8am on the dot. (why don't they start with hanging up, and instead ask everybody to waste time on selecting options is beyond me)
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Back around 2010, I lodged a complaint about how long it was taking for me to contact them.  They called me the next day and my original problem was solved the day after that.  My accountant told me that they have a metric for responding to complaints that was a lot more important than the metric of answering general calls.
It is what it is man 🤷🏻‍♂️ imagine what it's like for us accountants calling every day on your behalf 😂😂
July and early August are always insanely busy for ATO as is October.

Best to wait until September for personal tax things as you have until the end of October. If it is important and can't wait then ask for a call back.
Did they offer a callback? That's what I got when I rang yesterday.
I think the ATO might actually just be many thousands of bees stuffed into a trenchcoat buzzing all angry like
Phone contact is the most expensive form of customer access to a business. Any business. The ATO has invested a lot of time to ensure all the information you will generally need is available online and has developed a range of apps to allow both tax agents and taxpayers to do the transactional stuff a person needs to do with the tax office.

There remains a persistent cohort that, for reasons best known to themselves, feel that ringing the ATO is the best option. The bulk of these calls are for info or transactions that can easily be sorted online.

Providing extra phone resources costs money. A lot of money. Which has to be funded by the taxpayers. Who are notoriously rebellious at the idea of paying more tax. 

These are the reasons for your 'extended' wait times.

I know all of you redditors aren't like this and you're ringing because it's the only option for your unique problem. But you're competing with all the people who are too lazy to try self help and apparently indifferent to extended wait times.

(plot twist) 'Extended' wait times aren't extended at all. They are standard. It's called channel shift strategy.
Try email.
Call fridays
I got the “peak time” auto hang up several times today. Finally got through after 30-40mins around 16:30. Only to be told they weren’t sure and couldn’t help me with my issue.
I got through at around 3pm, Waited about 45 minutes on hold and then was talking to them until nearly 6pm. Calling around lunch time is an unlikely outcome..
If you ever want to get through to a government office look up the fax number for your local office, change the last digit and call. Within a few tries you will get through to a phone in their office.
If you screw up your tax return enough they call you
I did when I realised I forgot to update them with my new name. It took maybe 20min for them to pick up.
Yeah but I’ve always had to wait for atleast 45 minutes of more. I’ve even waited nearly 2 hours before getting through.
They close at 5pm, so I called them at 4:45pm and they picked up at 6:45pm. Just have to wait on hold.
Ok. When you call the ATO, pick the indigenous option. That’s the only way I got through.
Rather than start with hanging up, they could just not answer.

Why not ask your question here amongst the gentlefolk on Reddit and you could get the correct answer (mostly)
Yeah many financial institutions have code of practices surrounding complaint turnarounds to ensure they’re not disregarded.

Can’t meet the deadline? Hire more complaint staff.
Was coming here to say - family member is an accountant, and even she can’t get through half the time. And you guys have to listen to that appalling on hold music day in, day out as well…
they prioritize tax agent calls... maybe don't call them for basic shit you can do in the portal?
'Tax Time' is not a new thing for the ATO. It surprises me that they seem to forget how busy it gets each year. /s
Did they actually call back though? 
You're right. Downvoted, but right.
It's not cost-effective to buy the infrastructure. 

You need 4x the staff, call centre floor lease, comms, electricity, furniture/office space fitout, all of that for a surge of 3/12 of the year.

Cheaper to make the taxpayers wait on a queue.

So let it go. Don't file a tax return, BUT! keep a record of your attempts to contact them, it'll make a difference when they try to penalise you.

"Sorry your honour, I tried to contact them. Here's my log of attempts. I just couldn't take any more time off work to sit in their queue".
Yeah it was a couple of hours though. Still better than hanging on the phone.
Weird. I've never had any callback actually return my call before.  
