McNugget pricing in Australia should be criminal. What if I don’t want 24 nuggets? Do I now buy the 6 pack feeling a sense of shame knowing I could’ve paid 4 more dollars for 24. But I’d never eat 24 myself! 😞
Haha yeah who would eat 24 nuggets on their own?! I mean that's totally not something I'd ever do, and of course, 40 is perfect for sharing, so ive never even considered eating all of those myself in one sitting... Just crazy talk.
My guy if you feel shame for buying 6 nuggets when you can get more for a few dollars more then you might have some bigger problems going on 

It’s bottom of the barrel chicken nuggets that should be your main reason for shame 😂
Have you tried not eating the crap that is McDonalds?
Just the kind of quality post that I was looking for, terrible photo included.
Why wouldn't you eat 24 nuggets? Are you fasting?
Clearly the 24 pack is on special as it's cheaper than the 20. Just buy 10 if you're not hungry.

And it's common for the larger sizes to be "better value" to convince you to buy more than you need (known as "value size pricing")
I was complaining about $5 for 3 yesterday. But $5.10c! This pricing scheme is whack
Who the hell is buying 40 nuggets? These probably cost cents for maccas to make. Greedy corporations
On the app it's often way cheaper. And it's like 30% more in NZ. So don't complain too much 😂
My brother in christ!

Why are you doing this?!

Go to Aldi (or any other supermarket) and pick up a frozen bag of nugs. ~$6 will get you much more than what you desire from an establishment such as McDonald's.

In 15mins in the oven (less if you have an air fryer or fry in oil) you'll have your reconstituted chicken meat covered in delicious bread crumbs.
McDonalds is shit. Either accept it and move on, or don't eat the crap. Pretty simple.
Get a kilogram of nuggets from Aldi for $9. 15 mins in the oven, or 8 mins in the air fryer. Cook as many as you want.
Seems like terrible value given how much of the nugget is breading/filler and not chicken.
Here is Golden Nugget, shop somewhere else.
person discovers buying in bulk means cheaper unit pricing, something that has existed forever in any retail environment
r/Australia 's 10-times-a-day obsession with seppo fast food continues
Then dont buy nuggets, go buy something healthy.
Sorry for posting a funny picture of McDonald’s stupid pricing! I appreciate everyone letting me know how wrong I am for taking a picture of the self serve machine! I have learnt my lesson! 🫡
Just eat local from a small business. Its real food, not plastic and way cheaper.
FMD, I thought that plant based meat-alternatives were expensive!

How much for 3 nuggets?

I'll continue without either.
Serves you right for buying murdered animal flesh, let's hope prices keep increasing 🤞
24 for one person is just too much, much better getting 48 and sharing with a friend.
>I mean nobody wants to admit they ate 9 cans of ravioli, but I did and I'm ashamed of myself. The first can doesn't count and then you get to the second, and the third. The fourth and fifth I think I burnt with the blow torch and I just kept eating.
I think it's an age/regional thing. Raised that it's wrong (or even sinful. don't read as regligous, just a mindset) to leave food on your plate. That wasting food is a bad thing. I was raised this way, and it's a hard mindset to break.
When I was 15 I got my first job at Hungry Jack’s, and since I had the staff discount I didn’t eat any McDonald’s for over a year that whole time. When I went back to McDonald’s, I sorta lost my tolerance for that garbage. It made me sick every time. The burgers, both chicken and beef, the chips, it was terrible.

So, let me say this as someone who is fully aware of how trash McDonald’s is…

The nuggets are great though.

The nuggets and the hashbrowns are the only things that don’t end in me having an unpleasant toilet trip and they still taste great. I would not say the nuggets are crap. Everything else, sure.
24 pack is always cheaper than 20, no idea why. 

I used to buy them for my girls to share as a treat before one went veggo.
Nope the 24 pack has been cheaper for years. It’s what I buy for my kids as a treat.
No that's the standard price.
And as an added bonus they'll be hot
> Cook as many as you want.

Thank goodness you included that. I was about to cook a whole kilogram of nuggets!
It's just not the same.
Local burgers are $20 plus for chips and drink plus long wait time maccas is $15.. better quality for extra 5 or cheap and easy with maccas.
They'll keep selling it if people are buying. That's what blows my mind.
You must be fun at parties!

Bee murderer
If the price meat rises, it means the price of grain is rising especially when talking about Poultry products which would mean those on a plant based diet would also be paying far more for the food/products they buy. Some people just don't have common sense it seems.
Get to a vege farm and hear the lettuces and cabbages scream when they are decapitated
Haha, love a good TPB reference!
My mistake... Last time I bought them it was a promotional thing to compete with KFCs 24 for $10.

Further reinforces the value pricing - why would anyone buy only 20 when 24 is cheaper and only a couple dollars more than 10...
You know you want them all
Well yeah, you're not spending a dollar a nugget. The taste is the same tho.
