I can no longer rewind on ABC News 24 on YouTube ([Watch ABC News Australia live | ABC News - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vOTiJkg1voo)).  
This seems to have happened just recently (within last few weeks).   
It doesn't seem to be a thing that YouTube has implemented though sitewide, because I can still rewind on other live streams though.   
Is this something other people are experiencing on the ABC news channel too?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
It's a setting the streamer chooses to allow rewinds, although it can bug and break as well. I don't know if they can actually change it without restarting the stream.
Yes!! I noticed this 2 days ago but was too busy to post a thread to see if it was happening to anyone else, so thank you for confirming it wasn't just me.
Yep, noticed this too. I have the ABC stream on all day, helps for background noise while working. 

First thought it was a YouTube change - but then noted I could time shift other live feeds. I really wish YouTube could just fix this in the player, letting the user decide if they want to time shift or always "stay live" in a live stream. So personally I prefer the change here, but would like it to just be a per-stream option.
I also noticed when the ABC changed this setting. I used have it on a lot of the time and only rewound it when they put something I found irritating like politicians taking about politicians. I don't have it on anymore because of this change.
I noticed this too the other day!


I've reported it to ABC but haven't heard anything yet. https://www.abc.net.au/news/contact
If you're rewinding a live stream it's not live so nyaaah.
I've also noticed this.

I've also noticed that ABC News24 is blocked in Singapore and Indonesia now, so I'm guessing this is a worldwide change?
Wake me up when they develop the technology to fast forward a live stream.
Wake me up when they develop the technology to fast forward a live stream.
😂
