
Thank you for posting this, very informative. 'Interesting' that victims of Robodebt got $500 worth of legal aid while the sumbags that set up the scheme to persecute them got a 1000 times more legal aid. And Politicians wonder why we the electorate often hold them in contempt and rate them lower than used car sales men with regard to trustworthiness (apologies to used car sales men).
This was by far the biggest Liberal disgrace of the 2013-2022 Australia Liberal era. This alone should have left the party decimated and embarrassed to ever consider running again for reelection for 25 years or more. Robodebt was a sham from the beginning and anyone who put their name to it has real Australian blood on their hands
Some people died due to this. They had legal pressure and debt collectors on their ass.

500 dollars worth of legal aid is nothing to be honest.
Ministers of the robodebt scheme got more than 1000 times more in government funding for legal fees while defending themselves in the robodebt royal commission compared to people who took the robodebt scheme to court and had it declared illegal. 

It defies belief.
Knights in Shining Llama has done some of the most effective coverage of the robodebt saga, all of their videos on it are well worth a watch.
[deleted]
In the UK right now we have the Post Office scandal showing how Robodebt SHOULD have been treated.  Public hearings. Seizure of private correspondence.  QCs asking the questions.  Actions resulting in resulting suicides prominently put to those who made them. 

Very probably, prosecutions and criminal charges.

Another gross failure of the Australian media.
I was part of this. 

I was on single parenting payments, working and raising two children as their father died - then, I received a letter saying I owed over 17k to the government - I was so scared, stressed out, thought I’d done something wrong and was going to end up in jail. A year after the notification of my debt & repayments to the government, I was notified this was going to court and I was part of the class action- I eventually had my repayments returned to me. 

Other people took their lives as they were so stressed out about this, it’s heartbreaking.
The cost isn't the problem for me.  
Who built or provided this platform or software?

I'm sure a totally appropriate tender process was followed for this, including bids made by mates.

This is right up there with the Royal Post in the UK, people went to jail, just not those responsible.   
Remember people, many of you voted for this.
Rip to those poor people.
Makes me angry that there zero consequences out of this cluster fuck.

Everyone just pointed at someone else.

ScoMo deserves his reputation as a useless piece of shit.
What value can you put on a life?

Never forget. Never forgive
The pm was a farce.
HIs head as bald as his arse,
and the ministers with him were all wackers. 
We should never forget him.
For robodebt royal commission.
But him shitting himself at Engadine maccas
What an utter bonehead idea!
We need something like powerful Federal Governance Ombudsman. 

A person that can investigate government programs and even call a halt to their operation for clarification or review. 

The real problem was that the government and public servants thought that they were law unto themselves and they  could govern and make laws with impunity which they did and got away. 

There was no check or balances  that could  stop a rogue government that had run amuck. There is the auditor general but he does not have a power to issue a seize and desist order to government programs and legislation.

My expectation that nothing will be effectively done about the failure of a government that abused its power, nor will any steps be made to curtail such abuses in the future.
Kathryn Campbell, who was the secretary of
DHS when robodebt was established: "No, I do not accept that people have died over robodebt."
What price do you put on human lives? Take that number and times it by a 100. It cost that much.
Not to mention the lives it cost.
2000 suicides is the real answer.
Defund fat gov n fund ubi. No more robodebt and all those 10001 social programs that do not work but only sending money to cronies.
Too much.
In lives?

We must we considering lives right?
Not nearly as much as the NDIS screw up is costing us
[deleted]
Christian Porter claimed just under $0.8M, SloMo just under $0.5M, Keenan(remember him?) just over $0.5M.

Shameless, it did not protect them, yet there is as yet no consequence apart prom loss of non-existent reputations.
Yeah, but they have News Corp running interference for them. Their audience doesn't get information - just whatever paid advertising or propaganda is shovelled to them.
*after choosing SloMo as PM
 And It’s Still operating under Labor 
Now at ATO
One person killed himself
I really want to see those responsible go to prison. The crime of “depraved indifference” is what it’s called in the US. I’m sure there’s a different name for it in Oz. Just as I’m sure it’s fucking illegal there too.
My favourite part is the complete lack of compensation despite the massive effect it had on the lives of some people. There looks to be plenty of proof that the actions were intentional and undertaken in full knowledge that they were illegal, and there were genuine harms caused, but we seem to stop at the idea of compensating victims for sometimes years of being made to feel like criminals.
I really enjoyed their summary of each week of the royal commission, but I had to watch them in small chunks to keep my blood pressure in check.
As far as the liberals are concerned… they aren’t concerned.
At one point there was a suggestion of 2000.
You need to prove things like that.
>Very probably, prosecutions and criminal charges.

Let's not get ahead of ourselves yet, let's wait and see. We can hope, but to assume the rich and powerful face consequences when it's a thing that rarely happens is a dangerous thing to do.
They just announced an ABC TV show, to try and cash in on the Mr Bates effect. I wonder how much that will move the needle
They were basically using the existing software but skipping a step.

So at the end of the year you lodge your return through the ATO information is sent to Services Australia.  
  
Services Australia then gets a prompt saying they had income during the year and they may of not been eligible for  welfare.

Normally a person would then check this and if they're eligible then nothing happens but if they're not then they would be issued a debt.

Robodebt was the removal of the key person checking and just issuing the bill.

So a person who for 4 months of the year needed welfare but then found a job and had income for the rest of the year would be treated the same as a person who claimed centrelink while working.
And your taxes paid for it.
never mind jail. i think some accused even unalived themselves, like with the robodebt saga.
Why not just enforce the law?
[Graeber has an interesting take on this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6eyaDHj5I5g). (Long watch).  Essentially you don't need all the bureaucracy that checks on all the different pensions and benefits.  It works out way cheaper.
Wonder how that happened 🙄
You know what else was bad? Asbestos. But it's not relevant and entirely off-topic
The city loop faced similar reactionary comments as yours back in the day. Funny how we don't remember them.
You can make a thread on that topic if you wish, nobody is stopping you. It’s odd to come into a thread about a specific topic and ask why they aren’t talking about something completely unrelated

For the yes campaign I’ll think you’ll find it was quite extensively talked about at the time. I just don’t see it being a regular thing like robodebt becasue people killed themselves over this
Hey, wasn’t Porter an alleged anal rapist? Or am I thinking of some other pollie?
>They have News Corp running interference for them

Or vice versa
>but they have News Corp running interference for them

And Nine Entertainment and Seven West.  Let us also not forget that certain people spit the dummy about political bias if the ABC actually runs a story about the LNP that doesn't show them in a good light.
saw an ABC interview with him on i think it was the 7:30 report about his prime ministership and when the journalists refers to him as the "father of robodebt" you can see him physically grimace, so despite all his "we had the best intentions" BS rhetoric, he knows he dun fucked up.

he's a shameless person and will lie through his teeth in order to never take any accountability himself.
Source? I can't find anything to say it still exists.
Getting downvoted because I speck what’s actually happening in government departments to the Most Vulnerable People in society and obviously people are ok with it 

Doesn’t affect me the slightest but shows what kind of people are here on this form 
Well I will just leave it there
Dude, it was more than one. 2030 people died after receiving the letter. Sure, perhaps only 1 left a suicide note to blame them, but you seriously telling me that ALL 2029 others were just old age? 

Connect the dots bro.
Malfeasance in public office.
In Britain the question will be how far up they reach.  I suspect there will be just one or two scapegoats.  

And it could be the usual ruling class thing were mild public embarrassment and having to change jobs is depicted as having been tarred, feathered, and broken on the wheel.
I fear we are going to see that the English do that sort of stuff far better than we do, and fewer watch here.  But I shouldn't complain.

In the UK the TV series was a catalyst, but ruthless journalism by ITV was also a massive factor.  The latter certainly has no local equivalent.   Here, great journalism consists of buying hookers for Bruiser.
Also, crucially, the "burdon of proof" was put on the accused rather than the govt. 

In other words, the govt just accused the welfare recipient of owning money via an algorithm, and THEY need the paperwork to prove the govt wrong.

The govt don't need any real paper trail or anything, just a auto email from the ATO.

This was completely illegal and just not how the law in this country works. They knew it; they were informed that it was illegal. Any logical person or right thinking person would know it was illegal.

Those who spoke up were sidelined (can't sack them easily) and sent to the "pen" (hot desks in the main area, away from the nice offices). People who complained to the media had their personal details leaked and printed in the media to silence them with national exposure and shame (via old uncle Rupert).

But why did they do this horrible thing?

This was their answer to balance the budget and get "back in black"..... remember that??

ALP wanted to cut tax consessions to the wealthy, LNP wanted to extract the money from the poor.

As we all know, if there's one thing people on Centrelink have, it's enough money to pay off the federal deficit!! They are not serious people.

It was red meat to aggrieved right wing voters who love to punish the poor (lifters and leaners?! Remember that?). Playing to voters prejudice around poor people for votes. Disgusting.

How anyone even remotely related to this disgrace is still showing their face in public life is a mystery.
Not only that, but it went on for years with hank jongen on talkback, a senior APS not a LNP politician; defending the legitimacy of the robodebt campaign, when it was very probable that he knew it was an illegal program. He still fronts for clink, how is that!
Dodgy the lot of them
There was a major supermarket/variety store chain in the UK - went with a radical idea - rather than store every single piece of paper records that they generated - they would keep the bare minimum required to comply with their legal requirements.

It meant that if anybody had a financial dispute with them, they didn't have records to refute it. So they would just pay

People were certain that it would cost them money

It ended up saving them millions of pounds a year, because there were very few disputes, they were no longer paying for a huge facility to store the records, and they weren't paying people to manage and sort through those records when there WAS a dispute

The person who did the risk assessment and decided it was cheaper to just put up with a little bit of fraud, in return for not bothering with the complications, or paying for them...  must have been pretty persuasive 

No longer really a valid course of action with electronic records - because the savings aren't of the same order
[He was](https://www.pedestrian.tv/news/christian-porter-alleged-rape-dossier-documents/). It's a grim story.
Not was, is
Average income for Centrelink is still a way to make a debt 
What source would you like me to find 
It’s fact at all Government agencies they can average a debt and use it for debt purposes 
Which is what Robodebt is 

As above the only difference is a human now looks at it 

Legislation prohibits the use of income averaging to determine entitlements 
Entitlements are based on actual income for a set fortnight
You're presumably getting downvoted because the only comparison is the "robotax" claim, which isn't really true. With the ATO case, these were real debts verified by real ATO employees, not AI.

The "robo" part of the claim is based on the tone of the letters sent informing people of these debts and the intent to recoup them. It does not suggest that the debts were fabricated by an algorithm, as was the case with robodebt.

(I assume you are talking about the ATO's "robotax" that has recently been in the news)
Source 
Sources state only one ? 
People die everyday ffs

Plenty of google articles actually states no deaths were a direct clause 
Just a number made up by a greens party leader
Either way good odds 1 of 400k 👍
That piece of shit had my own mother thinking I might actually be a welfare fraud when she rang one of those talkback segments (don't blame her, she's of that generation). The lying subhuman filth told her that debts are checked and verified and if her son had one then it was most likely real.
What the fuck
[deleted]
That's a massive difference. The original involved sending a debt letter because they simply averaged out your earnings over 26 fortnights without a human ever looking at it. When I was one of the early adopters of Robodebt the people I spoke to at Centrelink refused to believe the debt had been raised in that manner because it was so stupid.

If people are looking at it and stopping it from happening except where there is genuine over payment then it's not Robodebt.
Yeh nah 
Shows true society at its finest
Even if it was 0 deaths ,the amount of harm destroys any attitude of "good odds".

Obviously, not something you care about.
That is what she said
Congrats on failing basic English.
figuratively, yes - he is still buttfucking the Australian taxpayer on a continuous basis.
Wasn't would indicate that he has successfully challenged and had overturned the allegations made against him in federal court.

Hence Charles "Christian" Porter is an alleged anal rapist.
Nope exact same thing - 


Using a Income to average to calculate a debt then issuing the debt without further consideration or explanation 
Still happening  
Think what you want

But the Act states each fortnight is considered a separate fortnight and income from that fortnight can only be used 
Income can not be averaged
You lied about the number of deaths it caused and then called the 1 you falsely claimed to be "good odds".

You don't even come close to being able to criticise "society". 

Absolutely disgraceful.
Poor bitch
[deleted]
You said in your previous comment that a human looks at it which is a fundamental difference. Does a human look at it or not?
Even with your attempted explanation, you don't get it. 

To say he *was* an alleged rapist implies the allegations are in some way gone. Presumably by a successful legal challenge that revealed his innocence.

As there has been no such thing, the allegations remain active, present, thus he *is* an alleged rapist. Not *was* an alleged rapist.

The tense will only change when either his innocence is proven or he dies.
once a pianist, always a pianist.
Not all debts are reviewed by humans 
But good day 
Not gonna argue 
Doesn’t affect me the slightest 
But shows what sort of society it is when others think it’s ok 👌
Was, in this case, implied a question. Rather than “is” which implies certainty. Was also is used in the past tense. Is in, were not the allegations made in the past. Not the present. However, The statement “Porter is an alleged rapist”. Is correct, as there is no question implied.
Robo: as in automated debt issuing with no human oversight.
Dig up stupid.
Define Still exists - it has continued and exists now
Yes society is pretty stupid to allow it to continue to happen 👍👍
