I'm getting to the point where I am going to be priced out of my home & my options are to simply not eat or purchase anything ever again or have anything crop up that needs money (sarcasm, but it's close to reality), or to move. 

I would be prepared to move almost anywhere with access to health services, but I don't even know where to look to find rentals. I do often just search realestate.com.au for the cheapest rentals in an area, but it's impossible to know where to look. I just hear a name, like Emerald, & see what's up with it. 

Do you know any areas that always have cheap, liveable rentals in Australia, or do you know how to search for them on the Web?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Some of my mum's aged pensioner mates are in "lifestyle villages" (ie. permanent stay caravan parks). Some are sharing their accommodation.
It depends on what pension you are on, but it can be affordable depending on your circumstances. My Dad is disabled and found a unit through the government really quick. He absolutely loves it there.
How much rent can pensioners afford? Also, this feels like it is going to end with a pensioner flatmate search website being created.
Sorry to say, there's nowhere cheap.   
Cities are usually more than country towns, but some of those are as expensive as cities.
Not sure what other states are doing but wouldnt recommend Perth. A bedroom for rent goes for around $300.....rediculous.

I hope u can find somewhere that is both nice and affordable.
You can search all of Australia on realestate.com.au. For example, right now there are some $120/week units... but they are in the tiny towns inland from Coffs Harbour. Wee Waa for example. So it depends what you mean by 'access to health services'. If you want a local hospital... huh. You might find a place that's got a community health service and still has cheaper apartments? Maybe? Like Hay in NSW currently has a unit for $150/w and also has a hospital in the town. But you're gonna have to be prepared to move to a small, out of the way place and live in a very small unit.
You could try ‘living well in bendigo’. It’s in kangaroo flat. Close to shops and a decent sized hospital.
Bundaberg is nice. Still a couple of places around the $300 a week price range.


Then you could look at Rocky or Mackay.
If your willing to share there is this site: [https://flatmates.com.au/](https://flatmates.com.au/)
My FIL rents privately in Toowoomba, and he's solely on the aged pension. He's not living like a king, but he gets along ok. Healthcare is pretty good too and everything is close together.
Search melton vic, melton east, melton west, harkness, Brookfield. Opposite end of vic - Hamilton, Hamilton east. Good luck 🤞
There's studio apartments near me in outer Melbourne that rent for 230 a week.
This might help you if your in NSW: [https://www.tenants.org.au/resource/rent-tracker-postcode-tool](https://www.tenants.org.au/resource/rent-tracker-postcode-tool)
What state are you in? Get onto your social/affordable/public housing list in your state asap. You are the target demo for social housing
Pets and pensioner wherever you apply probably under 10% chance you will be accepted. Might have to lie about the pets and hide them for inspection of that's a viable option
There's 1 bedroom units In Ballarat that rent for under $250/week.
What kind of budget are you talking about for rent?
I know some old blokes who rent units in regional vic, not glamorous but functional
Can I suggest looking at the NSW Hospital map online and then looking at towns where you would consider living and just start using realestate.com.au to look for rental prices that are within your price range

If you are retired and on a fixed income, I would recommend a town where there is at least a hospital.

If you live in another state, you could do a similar search for that state.

https://parking.health.nsw.gov.au/
You can do a search in realestate.com for all rental properties in a state and then sort to have the lowest price first. You can also set a filter to only show properties in your budget.

I'm so sorry this is happening to you.
Whereabouts are you, which state - and regional or city?  I am in Community Housing (transferred from Public (Family and Community Services) housing in NSW (regional not city).  It can be very tough for women.  It's worth knowing you can get a place in public housing and then apply to transfer elsewhere if you wish, there's just a wait of course.
There's little in the way of apartments on your own outside of those provided by social housing services and they are in extreme demand as you can imagine.

Forget most caravan parks, they are either as expensive as an apartment and dedicated to tourists or they are junkie infested hellholes. Just look for reviews online and you will find hellish stories. You're also not meant to live in them permanently and should be booted out inside 60 days.

There are "Cabin parks" which are converted caravan parks, they are for long term residents only and are more affordable than apartments. Of course you will pay a higher rate for utilities but they can be a good option when well managed. There's usually a waiting list of 6 months or longer. I suggest contacting Bluegum cabin park in Campbellfield if that appeals to you.

Rooming houses are probably your best bet, the kinds that are ex-retirement homes etc. Your own kitchen, your own bathroom (sometimes) and more affordable than an apartment, usually.
Try rural QLD such as Rockhampton or Bowen. Or Western NSW such as Tamworth or Werris Creek.
If you don't own your own home then your choices are very limited for affordable.   The only thing I can think of is caravan park or similar.
Remember when you guys voted for John Howard? Yeah, wasn't a good move ay
Doubt it
No
They voted Labor so this is what you get
Just be very vigilant

[https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-04-26/eureka-villages-rent-rises-on-aged-pensioners/103735936](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-04-26/eureka-villages-rent-rises-on-aged-pensioners/103735936)

[https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-07-15/lifestyle-communities-faces-challenge-over-land-lease-exit-fees/104091890](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-07-15/lifestyle-communities-faces-challenge-over-land-lease-exit-fees/104091890)
My sister used to live in them as a single mother through the 80s, 90s & early 2000s & now caravan parks are as much as houses in some places. Crazy isn't it?! But definitely worth looking into 😃
[deleted]
Is he allowed pets? 

I know I could go on a waitlist for government housing, & I'd be entitled to a one bedroom unit, but my sister was in social housing for decades & they were all dangerous. Fights most days, physical fights probably once a week etc. Stalking & abuse. I'd rather live in a bush shack. So he's having a good experience? That's heartening.
I watched a 7:30 segment on pensioner share-housing in the last year and [it's already happening](https://youtu.be/_H3M-oO3avs?si=iFMY5s_1O-w_uYyp&t=138) on Facebook etc, wouldn't be surprised if Flatmates makes a senior-friendly option to their website if they haven't already - I should go see if they'd done it already!
As seen in the documentary series The Golden Girls.
Plenty of people actually working who are forced to flatmates and won't ever get a pension - they are much worse off
That's what I've noticed. I always google articles on the cheapest small towns to live in & mostly find that they're barely cheaper or not cheaper at all than what I'm paying 2kms from the CBD lol. And they've got limited services!
It's cheap where I am
You don’t wanna know about Melbourne and Sydney 😬
Thank you so much ☺️ so do I! Lol.
I’m in Port Macquarie, a regional town in NSW about 4 hours from Sydney, and it’s at least $300 for a room in a share house here. Ridiculous!
I would be very happy to move to a small & quiet place. And yeah, I think it's prudent to move near a hospital. No sense moving somewhere if it'll be the reason I die 20 years too soon lol. I thought I'd tried searching all of Australia & it wouldn't let me. I have to try again 😂 thank you
I will google it 😃
Definitely worth the google, thank you 😊
I'll never be willing, but it will likely come to that lol. Thank you.
Ok! I actually have some hippies in my circle that don't seem like they're rolling in dough & they live there. Perhaps that's a goer! I'll get to googling 😄
Thank you!
That's affordable! That's really good to know, thank you. Added to my list ✨️
Thank you 😊
Given that my current LL & property manager said that if I didn't have cat things everywhere they wouldn't have a clue I had any, I reckon i could stealth them no worries 😁 but yeah, that's what I'm starting to feel sick about. I do think homelessness is on the cards, so while I'll try to strike it lucky, I'm making plans for that to be how I live out three rest of my life 🥹
I'll add to my google list, thank you 😃
Functional is more than a lot of people get so that will work for me!
Regional Vic is absolutely beautiful.
Not a bad idea, thanks!
I'll definitely do that. And thank you, I definitely never thought homelessness was an actual possibility for me, but it's a reality tens of thousands of people are facing these days. Wretched! That's why I'm trying to plan. Hopefully, I plan well & manage to side step it without ending up living in Squalor just to have a roof.
If you are elderly or facing homelessness, you will get boosted up the wait list and given priority.  If you have any public or community housing in your area it would be worth you giving them a phone call and explaining your situation, they may know of something coming up.  Places where I am (community housing units mid north coast) sometimes move because word gets around the area that a unit has become vacant.  They also will prioritize someone who sounds like a decent tenant.  It honestly pays to be pushing and keep asking.

  
I have seen public housing units that are terrible and even here we have men who cause real problems, but you can apply to transfer to somewhere else once you do get a place.  I find it difficult following the comments here but will try to come by later.  Hang in there.
I liked Tamworth when I visited. I checked rents there & they were the same as a major city though. Doesn't hurt to keep checking though. I've actually known quite a few people who's parents live in Bowen & love it. Plus there's a bonus giant mango 😂 thanks for the Google ideas!
Who are "you guys"? What makes me one of them?
How is that helpful?
Yes. Every last person voted for the liberals. Totally.
Nobody knows who anyone voted for. This is a non-political thread, & housing us policy failure on successive government parts. All parties are to blame for this, d9nt be a child.
[deleted]
Sometimes even more. There is often a premium charged for not requiring the same evidence of income etc that a typical tenancy requires.
I'm talking myself around regarding this. Unfortunately, because I'm a pensioner, my life is only to get worse every year, so I just have to start coming to terms with that now.
My mum is in government housing. Firstly a house on a normal street (she was in 1 of 2 government housing on the street, everyone else owners or private rentals), and then recently moved to a 1 bedroom unit as all the kids had moved out and she was living by herself in a 3 bedroom.

The unit she was moved to was specifically made for pensioners and has things like wide doors in case in a wheelchair user moved in. They are in a block of 6, everyone has a little courtyard. They are actually very nice.
I definitely know the reputation of government housing, but it's not always like that.
My Mum lives in a small government unit and pets are allowed but there are no yards so no space for larger dogs.

Almost everyone who lives there is lovely and the one unit of shitty people is pretty low key shitty so the whole place feels nice to be around.
If you apply for government housing, your allowed to turn down the places they offer 3 times before they take you off the list, so if a place isnt suitable, you can say no.

At least this was the rule about 6 years ago in my state, you might have to talk to them to see if its still the case.
Yes, he can. The units are quite small, so it's no good for a dog, and he's allergic to cats.
My mum owns her house but struggles to pay all the bills on her own. She's got three empty bedrooms and a pool, I've been telling her for years she should rent out her rooms! But, of course, it would affect her pension. They really need to incentivise this somehow.
I don't know what you want from me. What did I say ?
What in the name of blue budgerigars does this have to do with the comment you replied to?
You been drinkin' mate? You're having your own conversation lol.
Yes, if you are over 50 and need good medical, then you are limited to capitals.

Those articles have a very loose definition of the term 'cheap'. 🙂
Where are you?
I'm constantly shocked about prices all round the country, including regional. I shouldn't be shocked any more I guess! Just want to add for anyone reading this thread from Victoria, please spread the word about their granny flat scheme called [Public Housing Movable Units](https://www.housing.vic.gov.au/public-housing-movable-units). If you are on the DSP or aged over 55, have limited assets and are eligible for social housing, you can opt instead to have a granny flat installed for as long as you want for free in the backyard of someone you know, if they're willing and able to help. The rent is set at 25% of your income and the wait time is much quicker than social housing. I wish other states would offer a similar scheme, the wait times for social housing are a national scandal :(
$300 is expensive for a room in Melbourne. Must be in Carlton or something. Not even st Kilda costs this much.
And the politicians are selling off 50% of social housing in Melbourne and even Sydney. The corrupt stupidity is  never ending while privatisation still dominate even "the workers party"

Its staggering to think that this problem could be face by a substantial part of the population and all that we hear from the politicians is silence while they continue to ramp up immigration like they are having an enjoyable orgy.
That is insane, not even in metropolitan sydney...people are not gonna be able to keep going like this...
Type 'any location' into the search box. Set $100 as the lowest price (to filter out most of the parking spots listed as apartments) and whatever your highest price is. Search. Set it to list 'low to high' then page past all the storage units and rubbish that people list as liveable. I think the first thing you will find that is actually a unit is a $120 place in a town called Manilla in NSW. Then have google maps open so you can zoom in on the towns and actually see where they are and if they have a hospital or whatever else you want.
[removed]
I have had a small dog all the time and Housing never worried about it.  Where I am now in a block of units several people have a small dog or cat and it's fine - this is Community Housing Ltd.  I don't think you need to worry too much about having a pet, this is one area where public housing is more accepting than private rentals, where having a pet is a nightmare for people looking for a place.
Why are you telling them you have pets? I've moved multiple times and never once told them. Especially if you only have one cat, it's very silly for you to tell them. My mum got a rental and has 3 cats that she didn't put on her application, I had a cat I didn't put on, then a dog on the most recent one.
There are even some units and apartments for sale which are under $200k.

They aren't nice. But livable. If you had enough super then you could maybe service a loan with the pension.
Homelessness happened to me once, you're not alone!  If there is any access to a social worker where you are, or a St Vincent de Paul welfare shop these people can usually give you some advice. How fast you can get a place in public housing (or community housing/Housing Plus etc) depends a bit on your age and gender.  Here (mid north coast NSW) we have a renovated ground floor single unit that has now stood empty for 6 months, go figure.  I used to live in a FACS house in the central west of this state, my neighbours there told me after I left that for her it also stood empty for months on end.  It's unbelievable with so many folks needing a roof over their head that these places sit empty.
It's not imminent, my lease is until December, so I'm giving myself the lead time to do my homework & make preparations. I have a great LL, so if she continues with her usual annual price hike, I can adjust for one more lease, but if she doesn't, or I get one more year, either way that's it, I need to have made other arrangements. So I want to be well informed & prepped. I am definitely going to give housing a call & speak to someone about my options. The comments here have let me know that not all public housing is a nightmare, which has been the experience of my family members for over 40 years. 

The worst part about this is the huge difference in what I can control about my housing now compared to even five years ago. I could have avoided homelessness with a month to find somewhere & move there even then. Like, it wouldn't have even been a consideration or possibility. NOW, the options just aren't there. 

I also don't want to just move myself & my pets to a small town somewhere & hope I can get in on the more affordable housing. I have to try to secure housing, possibly in another state, sight unseen. I'm I Qld now. I'm not attached to being here, although the health services I use are important & it would be a shame to move away from them. But the world is a crazy place & I have to accept that I might end up somewhere or nowhere & it could suck for the rest of my life. I'm not dwelling on that though, just focussing on sussing out all my options & do the best I can. Thanks for your kind comments.
Some of the smaller towns within an hour from Tamworth are much cheaper if you don't mind driving a bit.
You said you are a pensioner, which means you were of voting age during the years of neo liberal trash governments
Oh I'm not helping, just pointing out how we got here. Something something leopards
Well I mean I'm no maths or anything, but apparently enough that we no longer have social housing for pensioners.... When did the Gov stop building housing again ? Maybe they should do something about that
Just here for a moment - Homes North Community Housing has new looking accommodation in Tamworth and Armidale, might be worth a look at their website.
I think that's such a great idea, to find a little community of friendly people in similar circumstances who can share a humongous house together. As we age, we deserve to have personal space & privacy, so ironically, renting a huge place with six people is probably better than renting a small place with one other! I'd really prefer not to ever have to share as I've always lived alone, but am well aware that beggers can't be choosers.
I heard you aren't allowed to live in caravan parks all year so you have to move around to different parks.
Oh well, I suppose it's a risk foe the park so that makes sense.
This is such a relief to hear! I haven't applied for social housing because it's a lot of rigmarole & effort, just to move into a never ending nightmare. This thread has convinced me to at least make an appointment & speak to someone about what could eventually be available. Thank you 😊
It's changed a ton over the years. My Dad has his own garden and maintains the flowers and trees. I bought him a vertical garden, so he grows his own mint and things now. It keeps him busy. It's great.
Hahahaha ok well that's heartening! I live in an 8 pack now & I have two high key shitty & three low key shitty so your mum's is way better!
I had this discussion with my Dad. He knew the rules. It only took him 2 months to be offered a place. He really wanted a 2 bedroom, so he was going to no. After a bit of thinking, he took the 1 bedroom. It worked out really well. They re-painted the unit and put new carpets in. It was pretty much a brand new unit.
Oh! Ok that's great! Thanks for that.
Renting rooms out doesn’t affect pension 
If you Report it correctly and income certain things 
It’s considered board and lodgings and then only a percentage is counted and then a percentage of outgoings is also 
My auntie could rent $900 a week in rooms before she lost a dollar off dsp 
And all totally legit
isn't the incentive of getting the extra money enough?
Include the PPOR in the pension asset test. Lift the test limit and match it with non homeowners. 

To manage the pension drop for those with more expensive properties, use the government's home equity access scheme. 

Do the about and your mum could collect the same amount and rent out rooms or downsize. 

The only downside is you will get slightly less inheritance.
That was probably aimed at Joel, who sidestepped logic.
Lol right? Left of field comment.
That is absolutely incredible. Why don’t I know about this. I live on acerage and would happily support someone this way.
Oh wow! I don't live in Vic...maybe I should start making online friends there lol. What a fantastic initiative!
Damn thats amazing idea, wish we had it over here.
Only in Vic ? I can move if someone want to help
TYSM 😊
45. DSP 🙃
Ok that's so good to know, thank you!
I beg your pardon? Who are you calling silly? Lol. I've declared all my pets & never had a problem. I don't look for problems, so until it becomes a matter of survival, the least stressful way to live is to be honest. I used to be a property manager & every single other one I worked with would revel in kicking out tenants who hid animals if they found them. PMs live for that power trip. Don't tempt them unless you have to. I would say you're the silly one.
That makes me so angry! Why are they doing that?! 

I read an article yesterday that said the waitlist for public housing has blown out to 2.5 years in qld & I don't know what they're talking about. My mum has been on the waitlist for nearly 20 years, there are people dying on the list.
It's good that you have time.  I found the public housing is very dependent on area and although I pay a bit more rent in Community Housing (I am on the Age Pension) it has a slightly higher standard than the FACS housing.  I knew a woman who got into Women's Housing and found it very good and I would prefer something like that too - we do have some very nice people here but it just takes one or two out of prison/on drugs to make life unpleasant.  I'm in a fairly costly retirement area coastal NSW.  
I got a transfer on medical grounds so keep it in mind that once you are in, this is always a possibility if you don't like where you are.  

The housing situation is a disgrace in such a wealthy country and successive governments have been ignoring it for decades.  The situation for renters has always been deplorable compared to Europe and other countries where renting for life is the norm.  I know someone who rented for years in the UK and she said there it's heaps better for renters.  Where I previously lived inland, there was mile after mile of nice little cottages that had once been public housing and then sold off and never replaced.  It's just disgusting.  I would say take a good look at whatever your equivalent is to Housing Plus/Community Housing Limited, because they seem to have slightly better properties.  We all say we at least have the security of knowing we can't be thrown out easily on a landlord's whim.  I won't be here anymore tonight but will check here tomorrow.  



I
Hi I can't get this discussion back in the correct order either!  I saw your thank you, I am just glad if I have been of any assistance and if you have questions later on just post again.  Good luck with everything!
Definitely don't mind driving. I'll get on google maps & have a spin around for ideas, thank you!
They probably still are and now you are also probably during the years of neo liberal trash governments. 

Not everyone voted for the liberals mate.
Could be on the disability support pension mate, not necessarily old age pensioner.
Not OP, but I'm a disability support pensioner. I was too young to vote when  John Howard was around. Don't assume all pensioners are aged.
There's been multiple decade's long policy failure on that. Why don't you spread your cankerous pustulating anger somewhere where it makes sense MUM.
Not really. They can evict whoever they like on their model. The extra is opportunistic as people who have fewer options can’t shop around. 
There are places that are for over 55 year olds. You can ask if you could get one of those. There is a block of units near me that has 20 floors for people over 55. They have a craft group weekly
I know lol, I will have to downsize 50% of what is important to me & go onto a one bedder. But that's how it is. I'm glad your dad snagged a nice place!
Shellharbour council did have a pilot program for tiny houses, I enquired and never get respond but granny places sound even better idea.
And look at how councils are rushing through legislation to block any attempts to help. 

Where I live they  regulate how long a caravan  can be on your property while setup. IE if the snobby tree change nimbys complain they will issue a fine. 

They are doing everything to stop people living in any form of micro or container homes. You can live  large acreage and they want you to apply for a permit to put a container on your property to even store things, and this on large acreage blocks. 

They have become very strict about approving  permits for sheds on land zoned as "recreational" farmland  etc etc. If they find any signs of dwelling on recreational land they will fine you. 

Private property rights Australian style, the nimbys and the snobs even want to own what you can do on your your land.  

I live in  semi rural area and now life is fast becoming miserable because of the tree change whinger nimbys, who complain about tractor noise, dust, grass height on dirt roads and everything possible. One whinger near me whinges to the council about farmers moving livestock early in the morning in a farming area. 

Its incredible how councils just listen to these people who just flew in last year to dictate how a small town should be run because they have now come and live in your town. 

Because of these micro shitbox estates that they popping up everywhere, even in rural areas the voter dynamics of sensible people  to the cookers is moving in favour of the cookers because local councils need the votes. 

The whole thing is a mess and there is no common sense governance or appeals process against stupid people and councils. They should introduce a whingers fee of a 500 dollars and people should use form to lodge a complaint. Its annoying when councils say they are "writing to you  about someone's complaint" but you really never know if its real or not or its some whinger who just drove  by in a car who is complaining. And yes they do this, the train spotter bylaws police sheriffs who think that they own a town or suburb!
Look closely into these schemes. The ones I’ve looked into have implications for who is listed as the owner of the property. 
Go to Gippsland, Vic
Yes I was surprised as I was in private rental before I got into Housing - I had to put in an application but they seem to be fine with a pet, this just seems to be a formality really.  People here have pets in the small units, it's fine, just means the dogs need plenty of walks. but there is a dog park close by.  My dog used to know everyone here, the pets actually help the community bond as everyone gets to know the various animals and who owns them.  It can be quite a nice community - there is always the odd trouble-maker but mostly people here are OK, and there is always somebody who will help if you are sick or need something.  I didn't find that living in a private rental

  BTW on the application form - where it asks if you are Ok with steps and how many - don't tick no steps at all unless you are in a wheelchair or very seriously disabled as it restricts the number of properties available to you.  Choose the next one which I think is a couple of stairs as most properties do have at least one stair somewhere in the front or back.  I forgot to mention this yesterday and it's a trap if you cannot manage one stair - always pick a couple of stairs.  No need to mention a pet unless they ask specifically either.
Yes, it's ridiculous. I think it's a combination of generally disinterested staff, buildings/houses/units needing to get repairs and refurbishing done in between tenants, and sometimes they are trying to find someone suitable if say, the neighbours are mostly quiet women they don't want to take men just out of prison.  But yes, it's disgraceful when here we have people living in bushland just nearby and a unit has stood empty but refurbished here for over six months now.  I was pleading for basic repairs to be done in my last place - an old fibro - which only got done after I had left the property. That house also was still empty many months after I had vacated it.  It would have been nice to have the gas leaks fixed while I was actually there, but of course they only got repaired after I had left.

  
There was a show a while back on Four Corners I think, about a young Mum in Queensland who was homeless and they drove around looking at all the empty public housing properties in her area that just needed some repairs done and people could live there - but nothing was happening.  

What I have learnt is that it honestly pays to be pushy.  Don't let them mess you around, keep harassing the Housing people.  They rely on people being easily intimidated.  The local Vinnies welfare section in this area is fantastic at pushing the Housing staff on behalf of tenants.  The accommodation is really poor and here I've had people raving on drugs, break-ins, police breaking up rows at night - it's not comfortable, but better than living in the car.  I hope you can manage to find something soon, it's very scary facing having nowhere to live.

If you can, also enquire about for Housing Plus/Community Housing/Uniting Church has some properties, depending on where you are.  The accommodation is mostly very basic, no heating or cooling here.  Once in you can apply to transfer across to somewhere else, so it pays to get a foot in the door - and there are pleasant tenants in public housing, it's not all bad.  Older people can get priority so if you are older, push that.
By the way what state/area are you (roughly).  Sometimes the regional areas are easier to get into than the city, If you have any condition that needs a hospital nearby, push that! Also if you have any personal character references/previous tenancy reports, these are gold, put them with your application.
You definitely have been a wealth of inside info i wouldn't have known otherwise, thank you!
Also look at local pages in fb and stuff, you will get a better idea of healthcare (biggest problem in regional australia). Some regional centres are faring better than others despite having similar rent prices

Eg Tamworth fares alright but a common mistake is thinking Armidale up the road has just as good healthcare when despite it being a regional centre.
Hey now Labor aren't neo liberal, they are a classic liberal government with a neo twist. Ok, yeah those cunts also cant build houses
If it's disability then call the ndis so the Gov can pay some fuckwit $1000 a week for a 1 bedder
You can't tell me what to do, you're not my real dad. Don't worry, Labor will have it sorted in no time, they just need to give some more money to developers. But seriously, chang Mai bro, Australia is fucked. Or just search for places to squat, plenty of foreign owned empty houses
Thank you 😊
Is the craft group mandatory?  It sounds mandatory.
Yep, same! We need permits for a truck, caravan even to ride small motorbikes on our own land. Everything you e said is spot on. My neighbour has transformed his shithole property and turned it in to something worth looking at while still respecting the area and their neighbours who are near on dead have caused so much trouble with council. They are deadset bullies, can’t even fart without them complaining. I think we can honestly do better than we are.
True, I imagine the owner of the main building & land will own the granny flat.
BTW, were you thinking of Toowoomba?  I know someone there and they love it  I just Googled and they seem to have some pretty new affordable housing there, it might be worth a look?
Thank you 💌
Queensland. And will do! Thanks for all the info!
I've been in the system for several years now so I guess I've learned my way around!  

Keep after the clerks processing these things - some people are trying their best in the public housing sector, but some of them take the jobs thinking it's an easy ride unfortunately - so keep at them.  

It's a demeaning system for tenants in many ways and the staff too often count on you being easily intimidated and/or uneducated.  The whole culture of public housing needs to change but meantime we're stuck with it.  I hope you find something that suits you before too long.  I put in a complaint about an incredibly rude clerk who did an inspection of my place once and photographed personal items in my bedroom without permission and without letting me know where the pics were going to - and they swapped him for a delightful young woman - so it pays to stick up for yourself occasionally.  Most of the tenants here are intimidated by the staff, but they're just clerks in the public service.
Great points, thank you 😊
That is not how the NDIS works at all unfortunately. Hell, you can be a pensioner on the DSP and not even qualify for NDIS.
If keeping the pension & moving somewhere with year round summer fruits was an option I'd be doing that.
Not usually, the people I know go to it because they like craft things. Each person can decide what they want
I think I saw examples that went both ways. Some required both people be listed as the owner and some the main property. NSW I think you had to add the other person as an owner. 

It has big implications when someone dies. Or if someone gets married. And then dies. 

Surprisingly fraught. 
I'd consider anywhere. Toowoomba has always had quite a high crime rate & lots of break-ins but I've lived in the worst street in the worst suburb before & nobody really came in & bothered us lol. 

Such a great tip about the stairs! In a perfect world I'd snag a duplex so I don't have to have neighbours above me & also won't have to have 40 stairs like i do  now to avoid being the downstairs neighbour 😅
My pleasure, wish I could help more.  I will come by tomorrow in case you are around/have any question I can help with.  You've done the right thing by looking around early and I'm sure something will come up - be polite but firm and push the Housing staff - keep contacting them - one woman here got into Legacy housing by complaining enough and she wasn't a war widow, I think they just had a vacancy at the right time. Good luck and I'll check in tomorrow for sure.  It's a pain isn't it - that we have let this happen in this country.  Bloody disgraceful that people such as yourself are in this position.
More fantastic points, thank you again!
Phew.
Maybe my friend lives in the good part of Toowoomba!  She hasn't mentioned the crime but Housing is not usually in the best areas, so fair enough!  

I didn't know about the stairs question until someone in Housing told me about it.  There is unusually at least one step up from the path to the unit or house, so it's safer to put a couple of stairs are OK.  No stairs is actually meant for wheelchair access.  I am applying to move into Housing Plus or its equivalent - the names change according to the area they are in - because they have put up villas and I am desperate for some private outdoor area - and they are apparently looking for good tenants who won't trash these as they are new.  They also have just two together, so one neighbour.  I do find it tricky in these very tiny units without any built-ins & there is no insulation or heating or cooling. I did know a lady who got into Womens' Housing and that seemed pretty good - she got a very basic villa, but that's still one-up on a unit. 

 BTW when I lost my private rental and was genuinely stuck for somewhere to live for a while, I got a temporary van rental in a caravan park and it was a terrific community.  

I'm about to sign off for tonight.  The application is time-consuming - I spent ages in the local library getting all the documentation together - I swear they use this to put people off.  Keep copies of everything!

Another thing people aren't aware of  - when I lived in a fibro house I had to pay for lawn mowing and this was about $200 a time every couple of weeks.  It was forcing pensioners to beg from the charities for food.  Apparently this is how the government puts the costs onto the tenants - the housing providers make it a rule that tenants are responsible for lawn mowing and my house was on a huge block that required a ride-on.  The cost was crippling.  I eventually had a kind neighbour who did it for me, but it's worth checking if you get an offer, if you have any lawn that you might be responsible for or if this is done by the housing provider. 

It's a big relief once you move it and can settle down.
It is a disgrace! You've given me a lot of useful info, I don't think I have any more questions. I appreciate the time you've taken to give me the inside scoop on the nuances 🧡
My pleasure again.  I wish I'd had a few pointers before I got into public housing!  You seem to have had lots of suggestions of places to live, I hope somewhere works out for you.  It's hard it you are moving away from friends/family & making friends in a new place is tricky as well.  I seemed to have mostly made friends when I had given up trying.  It's also tough when people have so much antagonism towards people in housing, that has to change - people naturally assume I'm in my own place and when I reveal I'm a housing tenant it can provoke odd responses. Mind you, it was the same when I was renting privately - the only folk not concerned were Europeans who rent for life anyway.  Australians have had a bad attitude towards renters, I hope that is changing now.

Do you know yet where you think you would like to live if something comes up?
move in, not move it!  Oops.
My pleasure.  I hope you find something suitable.  Just throw anything at them with your application that might boost you up - I put in personal references even though they don't ask for these -I figured some clerk might read one and decide to put me forward a bit on the list.  I got this place because they were looking for someone quiet after a particularly bad tenant had finally left. Once you're in, you can finally feel pretty secure - it is a relief to know a landlord can't suddenly put you out the door or raise the rent by an obscene amount - and the inspections are only twice a year and pretty superficial, unlike private rentals.  I truly wish you all the best!
Yeah that attitude is very weird. I'm autistic & don't see the world the same way many others do, & ranking people on their housing choices is illogical to me. I think if you're lucky enough to own a home, & that's your choice, then well done, good on you. I can't find a reason to denigrate those who choose or have no choice but to rent. Very weird to do that! 

If I could choose anywhere to live, it would be somewhere quiet, near a body of water, where I could have a yard for my pets & had a walkable & quaint town centre. From the googling I've done, northern NSW, down to the vic/Canberra border fits the bill. 

I would like to spend a week driving through some places. I liked Maitland when I was there, but I only drove through it, & google tells me it's got most of what I'd like. So I'd go inland that way & drive through some places, then come back & start looking for rentals. I'm in Queensland, so that's where I'd have to put my name on the public housing list now, & all the housing close to where I am now would probably not meet any of my needs other than being a roof over my head. I find the whole thing very overwhelming. But I'd rather get the ball rolling & just see what happens over the next five months.
You sound like you prefer the sort of place I do - quiet and peaceful!  I am in between Sydney and Port Macquarie but this area is getting so built up and busy now, it's being ruined.  If I could choose I'd pick a country town like Kendall, about 15 minutes from the coast but still small and sleepy.

I'm very introvert and I have neighbours here who sit right outside my door smoking and talking all day and it's driving me nuts.  If you are on the spectrum you definitely don't want neighbours like these!  Definitely somewhere with some privacy and quiet.  I understand needing those things very well!

  
I have to go out today but will write more later on.  Queensland might be less busy than NSW if you can find the right place.  I'll have a think and get back later!
Hi sorry I've had a day when I hardly stopped running!  It would be good if you could do a tour around like that and take a look at a few places.  Have you considered Armidale?  I know a couple of people who moved there and like it very much.  It's somewhere I've been thinking of as well.
