
It's a massive ramp up to do this.

1. Learn how to butcher properly
2. Buy all the equipment to butcher properly
3. Join a gun club.
4. Convince the wallopers you're the right sort of person to own a gun
5. Buy a gun.
6. Buy a gun safe.
7. Learn how to shoot.
8. Learn how to hunt.

Undoubtedly more steps along the way...
ABC with the clickbait titles again, although slightly less so this time. 

That said, having the deer listed as both an invasive species whilst also being protected by the Wildlife Act doesn’t surprise me at all.
I was once like this. I was a vegetarian who decided to only eat the meat that I had killed myself. After seeing the reality of it I then did not want to kill animals at all and went vegan. I actually have a lot of respect for someone who can actually admit to themselves where food comes from. They will probably consume less meat overall as they will not participate in factory farming.
This was basically why I first decided to go vegetarian. I figured that because I was an animal lover who wouldn't be able to face killing cattle and pigs and chickens ect. for food unless I had no choice, it didn't seem right that I was still buying the flesh of these animals (not because I had no choice; it was mostly habit because I'd grown up eating meat) and offloading any moral and emotional burden of killing them onto someone else, working in some slaughterhouse somewhere where I wouldn't have to see it. It felt unfair to the animals, and to the employees I was asking to do something I wasn't willing to do myself.

These folks also seemed to have the same thought process, and solved the dilemma in the completely opposite way.
More people should do this. People understanding how things end up on our plates is a good thing.
It's good to see a journalist being brave enough to step away from easy stereotyping and illustrate that a new generation of hunters and sports shooters are largely a diverse, educated, ecologically minded cohort. 

We face an increasing disconnect between the luxuries we consume in this lucky country and the work that goes into producing them, from the food on our plates to the electricity in our homes. 

With over a million licensed firearm owners in this country, it's important to differentiate between the attitudes we have to what we see in American gun culture, and the responsible approach to firearms ownership we have in this country, supported by legislation that (despite the cries of the media) have only become stricter and more onerous over the years.
In QLD it is illegal to take meat off the premises it was killed on unless with the authorisation of a Safe Foods Officer; it is also illegal to hunt in state forests; all recreational hunting must be done in private land with permission from the landowners. If you do what this lady does up here, or even just move meat from one property to another without authorisation, you could face fines of around $250,000.

So wtf is the point of this story? Yeah killing your own meat is better in many ways, but it's not always legal to do this, depending on where you live. Small abattoirs and local processing would be better too than mass production of meat but the regulations make it unviable for most people as a business. It differs by state, but generally legislation very much favours the big businesses over the individual.
Pretty sure there’s a word for this…

“Hunting predates the emergence of Homo sapiens (modern humans) and may even predate the genus Homo. The oldest undisputed evidence for hunting dates to the Early Pleistocene, consistent with the emergence and early dispersal of Homo erectus about 1.7 million years ago.”
If they target the feral cats and pigs (and buffalos if they're that far south) I'm good with that.
People eating off the land? What???? In Australia??????

What a remarkable concept. I wonder if it's ever been tried here before?
Yeah I am gonna start fishing my meals soon enough the way things are going 🙃 Good on them!!!
This is the only way I would go back to eating meat.
Shame that SA is banning bow hunting later this year
maybe just stop eating animal products, big shocker
Probably the only way to eat meat nowadays that doesn't involve animal cruelty.

Edit since you guys don't believe me https://www.dominionmovement.com/watch
What a psycho, just eat plants ffs
There’s good reasons we have the laws and regulations we do around food safety and livestock and also hunting and butchering….    this lady is an edge case outlier and what she’s doing is in no way practical or relevant to 99.999% of people.    But ABC gotta get dem clicks…🤷‍♂️
I shot a rabbit on my property this arvo with my air gun. Fucked if I’d want to eat it though.
9. Buy a 70 series  
10. Buy camo  
11. Buy fog lights  
12. Buy maxx trax  
13. Get bogged.  
14. Get the SES out to pull you out  
15. Get bogged again.  
16. Put an RM Williams sticker on the back of your car  
17. Buy recovery gear  
18. Call the Air Ambo after your mate gets the recovery gear in their face after using it incorrectly  
....
And to be able to afford all that too! (Having said that- once you have spent that money, 15kg of venison will cost you $2.50 and your time)
I feel like these people are just going the hardest route. 

1. Have chickens (or rabbits I suppose)

2. Feed them kitchen scraps

3. Butcher them after 12 weeks, pretty much just need a killing cone, a bucket and a decent knife 

4. Eat chicken 

Bonus: Eggs.
I know a guy who hunts with broad tip arrows and a bow... I think you can cut out about 5 steps with that. I've seen him down a deer and a wild boar.
If you make it a bow, there's a whole lot less regulations.
>That said, having the deer listed as both an invasive species whilst also being protected by the Wildlife Act doesn’t surprise me at all.

How is that justified?
It's a protected invasion by the deer-folk, simultaneously supported and opposed by the human-folk.
I think about this all the time. 
I’m a hunter and my sister is a vegetarian, she is one of the more understanding people who I talk to about it. Like you say similar dilemma solved in polar opposite ways. 
It’s somewhat ironic to me that the most vitriolic reaction I’ve had was from someone at a party eating a satay skewer. 
Complete disassociation from where that food came from.
It's absolutely not practical for most people to hunt their own food, even if they could deal with it. It's not scalable.


Many people have abstracted away meat and don't think about where it comes from. At least it's not the US, where it is considerably worse.
I grew up with chickens... mostly egg layers hobby level, from childhood, i know that chickens are ephemeral.
They die... a lot. ive seen 15 -20 batches in my life, lost count, they are all dead now, hundreds have dies form old age, flu, foxes cats, neigbours dogs and the odd rooster to me.

I was once slaughtering an excess rooster and my vegan housemate remarked how the hens were all traumatised the experience watching him die... i opeened the gate to their enclosure and they all came running and started eating the blood soaked grass below where i had decapitated the rooster...

The hens didnt mourn the rooster, they salivated over his entrails. The biggest mistake humans make is imposing their worldview on an animal. I let them eat, and i love chickens for what they are, but they arent us. I'll still eat them.
More people should do this because we have eleventy gajillion ferral deer.
I'm vegetarian and have been for decades, but I can respect this. A key reason for my being vegetarian is that I won't eat something that I wouldn't kill and butcher myself
Glass house abattoirs = more vegans and vegetarians and all that.
It only costs you a few dollars and a a youtube video to roast your own chook.

you dont need a rifle.
I would argue hunting generally won't give you a good idea of how things end up on your plate. 


Humans are specialists for a good reason.
That all sounds nice, but where the fritz is the need for 5,000 licensed firearms in a city LGA?

That is only the licensed ones.
It means qld is fucking backwards in the way it operates state forests and national parks. For hunters to do this is thousands of dollars being injected into the state. NSW and Victoria get it right. Hope qld followed!
To the best of my knowledge no-one has ever been fined in Queensland for taking game meat they've harvested home from the rural property they shot it on.
Predation? Pretty sure certain microscopic organisms prey on other microscopic organisms. It's almost as old as time.
You can get a permit to hunt pest species on Crown land for about $20 from GMA
Is that for animal welfare reasons? Fucking wild, I would have thought having less firearms in circulation would be better.
One less method for South Australians to hunt humans isn’t the worst thing that could happen
Why would we do a silly thing like that when its one of the best Protein sources we have, not to mention all the other products we can get from animals which benefit the whole of society.
As someone who butchers at least a portion of their own meat, taking a life is never cruelty free. 
"*Probably the only way to eat meat nowadays that doesn't involve animal cruelty.*"

Thanks for your opinion on the subject, its proven to be false and misleading as if you even understood anything to do with producing meat and other products for consumers you would soon figure out that an abused/suffering animal does not provide any value to themselves or the farmer so its in there best interest to produce conditions suitable, what activists show are the very tiny minority of terrible operators. 

"*Edit since you guys don't believe me* [*https://www.dominionmovement.com/watch*](https://www.dominionmovement.com/watch)"

No one needs to watch a misinformation piece by activists who arguably have no idea themselves.
Backyard chickens not edgy enough for you?
I do the same with stray puppies!
19: Get fish n chips from the local.
lmao! Sounds about right!

It's funny that there appears to be two sub threads in the responses to my comment. One obviously Australian, identifiable by the self deprecating humour and a few product names. The other with a very detailed knowledge of guns and ammo that I suspect is beyond the knowledge and probably interest of most Australians. And I say this as someone who's spent some time looking into whether hunting is a reasonable way of getting rid of the deer invading my mum's property.
Where are you getting .50 BMG for $2.50 a round?


Oh shit, tripped over OPs step 4
You don’t kill the chickens.  

The hens lay the eggs.  Harvest eggs.

Keep one rooster to keep the hens happy.

Let the hens raise chicks by leaving some eggs in the nest.

Play with baby chicks because chickens are awesome.

eat the Roosters because roosters are bastards when they get older (remember to keep one to make the girls happy and feeling safe)
The only thing that stops me from that....




What herbs/spices AND cooking methods go well with rabbit?   Chicken is pretty easy with almost 20 years under my belt cooking them in various forms, never worked with rabbit🤔




chickens have the bonus for eggs, but part of me reckons that rabbits would be less messy, I just lose access to unlimited **  eggs
Even that's a hard route. Go to this site and pick up some free food. You don't need the effort of cages or whatever. Just butcher it and eat same day.

https://www.gumtree.com.au/s-dogs-puppies/vic/free+dog/k0c18434l3008844?sort=price_asc
You don't just wander into a state forest with a bow and come out with meat. Bow hunting is a pursuit that takes years just to become 'okay'.
The Wildlife Act is also about how one interacts with wildlife it addresses the seasons for game species, it's addresses wildlife sanctuaries, it addresses general wildlife management rules, the use of prohibited equipment, the use of animals in research, it also looks at taking wildlife from the environment and breeding them, re-releasing and keeping them, the rules for dogs or cats attacking wildlife, import and export rules, use of poison, molesting or being malicious towards wildlife, hunting areas and hunting rules, the enforcement and prosecution of these various rules, the game management authority and their various reports, etc.

The Wildlife Act covers a lot of the ethics of treating certain animal species, it also addresses the idea of importing and exporting being potentially ways animal species may spread pathogens or other invasive species and thus require specific rules for said activities. The act differentiates between game, threatened and protected species, they don't have the same rules, it's not an act that covers all species as a blanket. However what invasive species it determines are covered is entirely arbitrary or probably tailored specifically for their role as game species regardless of their harm to the environment.
Same reason trout have bag limits despite being invasive - these animals were introduced to Australia for the recreation of European gentry and the laws were simply never updated since. It still is an uphill battle to convince people to place native species above introduced ones in many cases.
Basically hunters don't want them wiped out because they're fun to hunt. 
Oh, I agree. There's the initial financial costs, the difficulty of getting to and from the hunting ground, the amount of freezer space you'd need to store an entire deer's worth of food, ect. Also, there might be a lot of deer for these people to hunt now, but that's only because most people *aren't* using them as a food source - there just aren't enough wild animals to supply the massive amount of meat Australians eat.
r/thathappened
But very limited places where you're allowed to hunt them, which increases hunting pressure and drives the deer out of those specific areas.
Yeah it's nothing pretty that's for sure.
I've a mate who's vego but will eat roo and deer. Neither are farmed and meat is from culling. I respect the hell out of specific stances
So your problem is lack of skills.

From lack of opportunity.

Benefits of living on the land; learn mushroom picking, start chasing chooks and rabbits, help wit butchering sheep and cattle.
Its done in the middle east quite a lot and hasn't lead to more vegans/vegetarians, Its simply showing the entire process of how food gets on your table if anything it'll be a net benefit as There will be a greater understanding of it.
Let's not pretend that vegetarianism is based in any sort of ethical reality
There is very little choice in the modern capitalist society.
Could be Pistol shooters or Hunters that live in urban areas and go out bush during the weekends, The main thing is that they are licensed firearm owners and they know how to be safe with them and follow all the laws surrounding it.
Need? Different firearms are used for different sporting applications (you wouldn't expect a 3 wood to do the same job as a 9 iron), different firearms are used to dispatch certain game species humanely (such as rimfire rifles for rabbits, larger centrefires for deer and pigs) and then there's collectors.

All people who have been vetted by police as being of good character, who have had their safe storage physically checked by police.

As for unlicensed firearms, those people are criminals and should be punished to the full extent of the law.
Queensland backwards? Surely you jest
Yup taken plenty of Chittal no dramas
People do it all the time, and usually get away with it, but it is still against the law. I know of a couple of guys who were pulled up by police for being in possession of pig carcasses they'd shot in a state forest. The cop contacted Safe Foods. The guys spun some bullshit about taking it to a local independent abattoir and the Safe Foods guy actually attended the abattoir only for them not to show up. Obviously the cop "believed" them enough for the guys to bullshit their way out of the situation, but yeah it definitely can happen. 

It's one of those things that people do all the time but all it takes is someone dobbing you in and you could be in a lot of trouble.

Someone very close to me almost got fined that amount of money for processing cattle and then taking the meat elsewhere and only a very good lawyer was able to resolve the situation.
Predating most things, you might say
So is this word play? I presume it is, but i ain't sure.


"Predates" is not equal to or even similar to predation.
Something about bows not being ethical enough, but bows are plenty ethical if you know how to use them. It's just that restrictions on bows are non-existent compared to guns, so you often get more idiots shooting field tips at kangaroos and shit

Honestly I think it's a massive overreaction from the SA gov
Preventing the sale of barrels would help.
South Australian’s are hunting humans? Fucking hell.
> one of the best Protein sources we have

Heavily debatable considering the enormous amount of excess materials that goes into the production of it, let alone the ethics of it all.

> not to mention all the other products we can get from animals which benefit the whole of society.

The only thing you aren't mentioning is that said products are no longer even close to needed or beneficial, that non-animal variants exist and the only reason we continue to use them is because they're literal waste product from the gross excess of meat and dairy that's produced to fulfill people's unhealthy lifestyles.
Fair enough. It's about as cruelty free as you are going to get though.
This seems like a pretty self aware and insightful comment to make. Ever thought about joining the dark side and going vegan?
If it is a very tiny minority then why are they able to find so much footage? There's literally hours recorded every year. And that's only where they've been able to infiltrate, imagine what goes on with the rest. Ask yourself this, why don't operators allow access and recording within their premises? Why is everything done under concealment and security? Why are we not getting footage from live export ships?

Can you show me an animal meat production line that doesn't involve cruelty?
* 20: Spend 300 dollars on camping food and have a feast at McDonalds/KFC and take the camping food home. 
* 21: Spend 2 grand on Fjallraven jacket and pants
* 22: Call the RACV because you never changed a tyre on your new UTE and cant find the wheel spanner.
20. Try get home instead get bogged yelling "fuck me"
Sambar are big, but you don't need a .50BMG
Haha. You did.  

Ammo is so damn expensive these days. Decent 308 is about 2-2.50 a round. Atleast what I use.
 Let me understand, you got the hen, the chicken and the rooster. The rooster goes with the chicken. So, who's having sex with the hen?
deleted
I think you’re forgetting the Easter Bunny. Plenty of chocolate eggs to be had.
For rabbit recipes, buy just about any book on keeping rabbits. Perversely or not, just about every rabbit care book has recipes for preparing and cooking rabbit.

Having had a job plucking chickens, I'll take rabbit every day; chop off head, strip skin, chuck guts and your done.
deleted
Got a workmate who bow hunts. Sounds like a massive pain the arse. The amount of weekends he has gone out bush, tracked animals and laid perfectly only for something to spook ( and he comes back completely empty handed after multiple days sounds so demoralising.
If you don’t mind me asking, do you do bow hunting? And whereabouts in Oz are you? Looking at trying to figure out where and how to start learning to hunt and was kind of curious. 
Thank you that's very insightful.
I don't restrict myself when going out etc., but at home I eat a lot of game meats and offal for that reason.

The exception is chicken. For some reason I can't give it up. Love me some chicken
I don’t eat meat other than veal. I can’t enjoy a meal knowing what I’m eating has had anything resembling a decent life. Do you respect the hell out of my specific stance?
Yep. It's not a black or white decision. Nice.
I really wish I could get deer, camel, or goat for anything like the price I can get roo, though.

I like all of 'em. My family predominantly eats roo.
No, my "problem" is that I don't want to kill a living animal so that I can eat when I can happily and easily feed myself with a plant based diet.  I'm not judging those that do, it's a personal choice. But I am constantly surprised by how much my being vegetarian seems to annoy some people
> According to a Nielsen survey, the Africa/Middle East region (of which Egypt, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, United Arab Emirates were surveyed), has 16% vegetarians and 6% vegans, making it the second-most vegetarian region after Asia.

I don't know, sure does seem like they have a higher proportion of veganism and vegetarianism and that you're just doing your usual thing where you pretend that factory farming is sunshine and rainbows.
No longer supported by Australia. WA sheep is the start. Indonesian cattle is next.
I don't get the downvotes

At 8 billion in number, egg laying hens are close to the worst existence caused by humans to date  
[https://ourworldindata.org/do-better-cages-or-cage-free-environments-really-improve-the-lives-of-hens](https://ourworldindata.org/do-better-cages-or-cage-free-environments-really-improve-the-lives-of-hens)
Population means we have little choice if we want to eat.meat, at least right now.
Underrated
Hunting is predation as in humans hunting prey. I'm well aware that predates and predation are different words. As in predation/hunting is almost as old as time.
I mean, yeah, but don't they already require a hunting license?

You can still buy a bloody bow, is it going to stop anyone from doing anything?
Hopefully someone hunts you with a bow seeing as it's so ethical!!!
Dan Andrews leads the hunt.
"*Heavily debatable considering the enormous amount of excess materials that goes into the production of it, let alone the ethics of it all.*"

There isn't much if any Excess materials going into the production of Meat and or other products associated.

"*The only thing you aren't mentioning is that said products are no longer even close to needed or beneficial, that non-animal variants exist and the only reason we continue to use them is because they're literal waste product from the gross excess of meat and dairy that's produced to fulfill people's unhealthy lifestyles.*"

Many of the said products do not have any equivalents or replacements but thanks for your opinionon the subject once again its proven to not be informed on any level. They aren't excess, its simply making sure that none of the animal goes to waste like animal AG value adds onto the waste streams from Grains and Fruit/veg production so we aren't allowing millions of tonnes of food waste into landfills.
"*If it is a very tiny minority then why are they able to find so much footage? There's literally hours recorded every year.*"

Having hours of footage isn't that much of a gotcha moment you believe it is as you could easily get those "hours" of footage from simply leaving cameras rolling 24/7 like they do and capture nothing. 

" *And that's only where they've been able to infiltrate, imagine what goes on with the rest*"

Yes Illegal trespass, Breach biosecurity and endanger themselves for attention on the internet. Its pretty clear the intentions of activists and its not to improve animal welfare/husbandry, its to spread misinformation.

"*Ask yourself this, why don't operators allow access and recording within their premises? Why is everything done under concealment and security?*"

People have proven to not be trusted when they are allowed to enter facilities so now they are outright banned from entering until they can prove they won't manipulate and or change the facts to benefit the agenda they hold like many Animal welfare groups do as there is attention in outrage and no attention in the truth/facts. 

"*Why are we not getting footage from live export ships?*"

There is plenty of footage from Live export ships, [ABC Vessel tour surrounding Live sheep](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mbnGY-hwrDE), [ABC vessel video surrounding Live cattle exports to Indonesia](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LZ3JAyfzLMs), [Vessel stock worker who shows conditions on board constantly](https://www.instagram.com/miss_rae93/?hl=en) But hey I know based on your comment here you'll write it off as "industry propaganda" instead of looking at the facts but then again if we purely went off the facts Live sheep exports wouldn't be banned but instead the government is only listening to Misinformed and uneducated animal rights activists who have never stepped on board a live export ship or even a farm before. 

"*Can you show me an animal meat production line that doesn't involve cruelty?*"

Yes 99% of them, its not difficult to do things by the books but what we commonly see is the very tiny minority of operators doing the wrong thing in regards to welfare and husbandry standards.
FAAAACK MOYYY!
This is the only bit I can imagine doing so far
Sigh.  Ok.  .338 Lapua magnum will have to do... I guess...


Can I at least keep the muzzle brake?
Just buy some Federal Power-Shok and call it a day.
😏
That's perverse.
I have had duck several times and I don't mind the taste, maybe I'll have to give it a crack sometime.


Thanks for the helpful info and such :) 
The goose that lays golden eggs has just entered the chat!
Half the fun is the adventure, it's like a nature hike but you're tracking and stalking prey. It's appealing to  me as I also Spearfish alot

But if you plan on getting a feed definitely a rifle is the way to go
Try fishing.
Bow hunted for about 8 years now. Your starting point is buying a bow, finding a local archery range and learning to consistently shoot well.

When you got that sorted, you need to book and sit a test for an R license which gives you permission to hunt in most NSW State Forests.

When you can shoot well and have your R license, then you can expect a few years of having the opportunity to draw on an animal MAYBE once a year if you do everything right and get lucky on public land.

A better way to start is to become a good rifle hunter, then transfer that skill set into bow hunting.
You support the slaughter of babies!
How about animals that seem to have a horrible existence but won't fill out the questionare, like koalas, pandas and anything living in or on something else's colon?
While veal is a bit subtle for my taste, I do appreciate your dirty veal burgers. I can't get behind your preference for blaut though, that's just nasty
Roadkill, but the tip is to avoid the blue crane.
"*you're just doing your usual thing where you pretend that factory farming is sunshine and rainbows.*"

Or I am simply sharing what I've seen relating to the comment that General made and you are some how twisting it into something completely different like you commonly do.
The Indonesian cattle trade isn't likely to be stopped, It provides a massive value to the Australian economy and represent thousands of jobs with very little issues occurring in regards to welfare and husbandry breaches, there also is no way they can lie that Indonesia would cover the same volume with boxed product like they have done with Live sheep exports which has only shown a massive decline in sheep numbers and overall excodus from the industry.

The government is still yet to pay out the current unlawful 2011 ban Class action as they refuse to pay farmers what they are entilted for especially when they consider 150 million to be justifiable when its closer to 500 million at a minimum to cover all the losses associated with the ban, They are continuing to drag out the process instead of ending it after 13 years.
All male chicks macerated, all female chicks bound and forced to lay eggs until they collapse. The dairy industry is not better in any way, constant rape + impregnation cycles to keep them producing milk, male calves killed off, female ones prepped to be entered into the cycle, it's monstrous.
Chook yards   at home were a very common feature in my youth. Now chooks and rabbits are virtually impossible due to modern regulations.
Could ask that for a lot of laws really. Point being it's a lot easier to go and be a dickhead with a bow than a rifle because there's nothing stopping you from getting one except cash
Is that a joke or a threat?
Swing and a miss.
Not if you're shooting next to me, you can't. And you can lug the bastard out through the scrub yourself.
Least fishing you are often drunk and sitting in one spot. Opposed to sober and hiking.
Convenient that "what you seem" runs counter to reality, and just so happens to align with the notion that folks aren't bothered by glass house abattoirs. Sadly for you, facts prove that you're mistaken.
Still sad but. Humanity is summed up pretty perfectly with live export. We truely don't give af when it comes to any living being but ourselves.
It's also *really* easy to hear a gun being fired, not so much a bow.
"Wahhh I'm the victim. Someone said mean words to me in a hypothetical over the internet - please feel bad for me as I ruthlessly murder other people!!"
Lugging much heavier ones through the bush for the government has tarnished me, now a single gram of unnecessary bullshit on my rifle makes me wild.
Convenient you dislike when any one with knowledge on the subject speaks on the subject you call it "misinformation" or "Propaganda".

"*and just so happens to align with the notion that folks aren't bothered by glass house abattoirs.*"

Yes as those families who go to these sort of abattoirs are typically doing so for Religious/Gathering reasons as they select the animal watch it go through the entire process then go home and cook that entire animal to eat as a family, I'm sorry if you can't grasp that sort of information.

"*Sadly for you, facts prove that you're mistaken.*"

Great for me since you have no idea what you are talking about and make up the information you speak about in 99.99% of cases but refuse to acknowledge that fact.
Livestock are typically under better conditions on board a Live export vessel then what they are in a paddock under the Australian standards which are world leading.
So it was a threat then.
So you've got iron sights on that. 50BMG? Good man 👌
There's a fair few qualified people that would disagree with you there.

I still think Australia should be looking to invest in more future proof industries. The fact that in 2024 we are trying to argue the viability of sending animals across the world to be slaughtered is sad.

We are a lucky country relying on exploitation of a few unlucky species.
"*There's a fair few qualified people that would disagree with you there.*"

Yep The handful of vets that left the industry for doing inproper jobs over a decade ago and try to paint the picture that all export vessels are the same conditions as what they experienced which is just untrue by miles since we have constant evidence of current conditions and practices.

"*I still think Australia should be looking to invest in more future proof industries. The fact that in 2024 we are trying to argue the viability of sending animals across the world to be slaughtered is sad.*"

No doubt we should be looking into investing more into on-shore processing and marketing avenues but they have to give a lot longer then 4 years for that to occur in the case of Live sheep exports with the most recommended timeline being 8-12 years for optimal transition with growth of the industry not the massive degrowth we are currently experiencing due to this governments inability to talk to the experts and professionals and only listen to animal rights activists who haven't got a singular clue about the agricultural industry, not to mention the inadequate funding they've provided for the transition process when even the WA government was saying it was closer to 400 million to fully transition the industry away exports.
Would the rhetoric be different with a 8-12 year timeline though? I feel the writing has been on the wall for the live export industry well before the current 4 year timeline. There is no denying that general public sentiment for live export has been unfavourable and those within the industry are surely aware of that.

I'm hoping to look back on this and see that 2024 was the swan song of the industry. Do we want to be defined as a nation that survives on exporting raw materials and live animals to developing nations?
