
Its never going to stop while political parties are owned by the donations they receive from the gambling industry. The Politicians fear the mafia strangle hold that the gambling industry has over the democratic process. No change is possible, its corrupt.

Every time that they have an inquiry into the industry with minor changes, then the next month they get compensation by allowing the increase in the number of machines. Its amazing how utterly corrupt  the whole governance area is in gambling policy.
Ban all pokies Australia wide 

let em gamble one of the other ways after all its our national passtime
>Approximately $95 billion in cash flows through poker machines in pubs and clubs in NSW each year, making this the gambling capital of Australia.

Frick'n $95 billion! That's a lot of stinky 🧀


So then... 

If NSW has a population of roughly 8,250,000 people of all ages.

and... 

The calculated monetary throughput of all pokies within NSW is a staggering $95,000,000,000 per year.

then... 

Assuming every person of every age within the NSW borders payed their fair share of the pokies bill. That bill would cost each person lucky enough to be a permanent resident within NSW $11,515 each.

Now...

Do a rough estimate in your head, what percentage of the 8,250,000 NSW residents that don't gamble on the pokies, then consider what percentage of those that do gamble on the pokies but don't have hundreds of thousands of dollars in disposable ill gotten gains to launder through the NSW industrial pokies complex each year??? 

Wow! Just wow.

Please don't hesitate to correct me if my calculations and answer appear to come from an alternative universe. In my defense, I used Microsoft calculator ;)

Edit: Added, me pretending I can number in public.

Edits: Added, 'per year' for better accuracy. Also, for continuity, I will be updating the relative corresponding quote within my other comment within this thread.


All the best,

peace.
Money corrupts and is a powerful motivator. Threaten to take it away from pubs or other benefactors of the industry and there will be a fight of monument proportions. 

Personally, I hate slot machines but accept everyone has a right to make their own choices.

Perhaps more of the profits and licensing fees could be spent on identifying and helping those suffering from a gambling addiction.
Your math is completely off because poker machines have an 85% Return to Player - your math relies on the idea of a 0% RTP.

Total annual ‘losses’ from poker machines in NSW was $8.1 billion, that’s the ‘pokie bill’, not $95 billion. Still a lot of money - but in comparison for example NSW households spend ~$14 billion on alcohol and tobacco a year, ~$2 billion on lotto, and around $160 billion on ‘discretionary’ spending. 

The losses per resident figure is probably closer to $1,000. One good thing with the cashless gaming is that we should get more stats on what the loss distribution actually is.
Cool. I'll trust your math for now. Also thank you for diving deeper into the numbers that casually point at the criminal assist within its design.

That said though. And for the sake of clarity. I wasn't trying to explain the profit and loss variables of the NSW pokie-criminal complex. I left that for you friend.

I was simply attempting to comprehend the greater dynamics of the gambler/money launderers ratios within the NSW pokie-criminal complex. As shown via the following quote from my original comment. 

 > The calculated monetary throughput of all pokies within NSW is a staggering $95,000,000,000 per year.

Also. I may be wrong, but when you say..

>Total annual ‘losses’ from poker machines in NSW was $8.1 billion 

Is that code for, 

Total annual ‘profits' from poker machines in NSW after expenses, was $8.1 billion.

Let me know.

Edit: Re-jiggered my word stuffs to avoid an outbreak of mass hysteria ;)

All the good things.

peace.
> Total annual ‘profits' from poker machines in NSW after expenses, was $8.1 billion.

It’s the gross profits for those operating the machines, the net profits are lower - the state government takes a cut of about $2.5 billion, plus the (significant) acquisition and operating expenses. 

> I was simply attempting to comprehend the greater dynamics of the gambler/money launderers ratios within the NSW pokie-criminal complex.

You really can’t work out the ratios from the total turnover, a problem gambler can rack up huge amounts of turnover while ‘only’ losing an ordinary families worth of discretionary income. Whereas someone money laundering wouldn’t turnover their money as many times, so would contribute a smaller amount to the total turnover.
