I accidentally opened someone else's mail. It was delivered by mistake to my address and I didn't look at the name until I saw the goods. My intention is to just repackage it, write an apology and explain the above, and deliver it to my neighbour, but I'm a bit nervous as I know mail tampering is a serious offence. This really was an accident.

Can anyone please advise? Is there a protocol I should follow?

EDIT: Thanks all, due to the comments here and a Google search, I have decided to reseal it and put it back in the post box labelled "delivered to wrong address, opened by mistake."

Having Australia Post involved covers me more than just hoping my neighbours (whom I have never met) are nice about it.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Shit happens. Just talk to your neighbour.
“Customs inspected and cleared” note taped to the top, edit reddit post, delete reddit post what package?
If you're worried about talking to your neighbour just take it and the original packaging to the post office and tell them it's not for you and was in your mailbox and you opened it by mistake. They're not going to immediately arrest you for a mistake like this.
Might as well just hand yourself in straight to Goulburn Supermax, sorry
If you are that worried. sticky tape it closed and Write "delivered to wrong address" on it, then re-post it. Aus-post will re-deliver it.
> EDIT: Thanks all, due to the comments here and a Google search, I have decided to reseal it and put it back in the post box labelled "delivered to wrong address, opened by mistake." 

Ahh fellow anxiety-sufferer, how goes it.

Do you also hate calling companies?
If you repackage all the white powder back in it you should be fine
Hi, I own a Post Office, you’re fine mate, it’s an accident and happens to people sometimes, especially if you’re expecting a parcel. I don’t know your neighbours but I’d be pretty happy that you passed it on. If you feel awkward about it, take it to your local PO & explain what’s happened & leave it with them. Mail fraud is a little bit more involved than an opened in error parcel but I love your moral compass 👍🌈
Calm the fuck down. Shit happens.

Also maybe spend some time reflecting on why you went full blown freakout over something mundane
Hey dude, it’s ok. A quick google suggests that Australia isn’t as psychotic as other countries. So long as you return it all to either the intended recipient or to the postmaster with return to sender you should be golden. But I get where the anxiety over it comes from.
Post doesn't care. The mail officers on manual sort at your local mail centre will just sort it into the right frame and it'll go out to a DC and then delivered by a postie. No-one will care at Post. They sort tens of thousands of letters per day; nothing is unusual or surprising; they'll see it dozens of times per day. They pick up the letter, read the postcode or sender (depending on whether it's RTS or not) and it'll be sorted. If it's readable by an MLOCR (multi-line optical character recognition machine, built by Lockheed Martin, IIRC), it'll get processed and it'll be one amongst 500 going to any particular suburb sorted that hour, picked up in big handfuls and placed in cardboard trays and strapped up to be sent out.

Source: was a mail officer when letters were still a thing
Im reporting this post to the AFP for mail fraud. Either turn your self in to same them the heavy lifting and maybe let you off on a lighter sentence.
If you can change the envelopes you could quite literally just repost it and no one would be the wiser
That’s very honest of you, one of my neighbours has my led vanity mixer tap after it was delivered to the wrong number.
Yep, I know this, and that would normally be my go-to.

However, I don't know this person, and people aren't always reasonable. I want to cover myself legally.
Was about to say this. No point resisting.
I will do this, thank you.
Thank you for getting it, the edgelords in here are having fun with mocking me for how ridiculous I apparently am...well, it is r/australia after all, I would expect nothing less, lol.

I actually don't mind calling businesses (the reason I didn't call AusPo was because it's outside business hours.)

Personal calls, though? Pls no. 😂
That's so nice of you to say. Thanks so much! :)
[removed]
Thanks. :)

I have resealed it and put a note on the front, will be posting it tonight.
Your advice weird
To be fair to them, it's not necessarily deliberate. It's easily the sort of thing that could be forgotten about with all good intentions. Bummer you don't have it, though.
Cover yourself legally? I mean how is anyone going to know that you opened it? Unless you write on the envelope "opened by *insert name and address*" then there is absolutely no way for anyone to know you're the one that opened it.

Panicking about nothing.
You’re way too worried about this.

Prison isn’t that bad.
No one fucking cares.
Haha I feel ya mate. I did find your response hilarious but that's something I'd do if I were anxious of doing the activity. 


You did what you thought was best for you and your neighbor.
Nah, you are way overreacting.
I've made a comment in the main thread. Am a former mail officer at Australia Post. No-one there will care; there's literally no place in the facility for them to place mail that has been opened in error. There is a DLO (Dead Letter Office) for addresses that are unreadable, have come unstuck or if it is RTS with no RTS address. The main just sits there, waiting for someone to one day claim it. Otherwise, your letter is one of tens of thousands they'll sort that day, and no-one will even give it a second thought. If the letter is hand-sorted (which will sometimes happen if the letter is damaged and the MLOCR or barcoder rejects it), all they're looking at is if the suburb matches the postcode and it gets flung into a sorting frame and they move on to the other hundreds of letters they need to hand sort. I promise you no-one there is thinking about a letter opened in error. They're thinking about where they'll be rotated to in the building, next, why some people insist on using such bright envelopes that your eyes hurt to read the address, if overtime is on the cards, what time's lunch, and why the dock isn't moving the ULDs. Average mail officer probably has sorted 20 of those 'opened in error' each shift and didn't even think about it.
Depends on what they found in the parcel. What if it was some illegal crap?
