Bit of an odd question but I never travelled cross state on a train and I wanted to know what normally goes along standard gauge 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Which state? NSW is all standard gauge and all major interstate routes are SG but outside that the other states are a hotchpotch of gauges.
Standard gauge is the main gauge in NSW and ACT.

Also the following interstate routes are standard gauge:

* Sydney - Brisbane
* Sydney - Melbourne
* Melbourne - Adelaide
* Sydney - Adelaide - Perth
* Adelaide - Darwin
Standard trains?
Benalla to Oaklands is Standard Gauge despite being a V/Line line.
The Overland does - Adelaide to Melbourne.  But freight runs on those lines too. 
For passenger trains: any train run by Transport NSW or Journey Beyond plus Vlines Albury line.
I looked at a map and some other states have standard, I’m preferably looking at NSW and VIC
Standard gauge
They used to do bogey swaps.

But now only standard gauge  travels deep past a state border.


The wikipedia article has distances covered by dual gauge and borrowed gauges.. . and that is very little  for all states..

So  none-sg rolling stock has to remain  at their own state (vic and qld) and even their  region ( perth and adelaide)
This is for passenger lines only:

NSW passenger trains are all standard gauge including the XPT to Brisbane Roma St.  The VLine service to Melbourne uses the North East Standard Gauge line into Southern Cross.

Victoria’s VLine north east line is standard gauge beyond Seymour.  Any train going to Albury will be a standard gauge service.

All other V/Line operated trains in Victoria are broad gauge.

The Overland Melbourne to Adelaide operated by Journey Beyond is standard gauge.  Same with any other Journey Beyond service operating through Melbourne or anywhere in Australia.

Queensland intra state trains are narrow gauge (Inlander, Tilt Train, Westlander, Spirit of Queensland and QR CityTrain network).

Adelaide suburban services are broad gauge.

Perth suburban trains and the Australind to Bunbury is narrow gauge, the Prospector to Kalgoorlie/AvonLlnk/MerredinLink are standard gauge.
Ironically Adelaide-Melbourne was the only non stop intercapital journey up until the standard gauge line was extended to Brisbane.  Both states used Broad Gauge (SA used narrow gauge in the mid north and Eyre Peninsula for cost reasons.


Before then you would change at Albury between Vic and NSW, Wallangarra between NSW and Queensland.

The commonwealth built the transcontinental line to standard gauge so you’d change at Port Augusta and Kalgoorlie.
