Looking to fly Melbourne to Sydney return in a few months time. I want to take a friend but not sure which one will come along. Can I secure the seats on a flight now and change the name later? Anyone have any tips?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
You can but usually there is a fee for changing the name. You could also just risk it, I’ve never been asked for ID when flying domestic so should be ok
Nope
I've never been checked for the Id on a domestic flight
Over the last 10 years I could have been on well over 500 flights. Never once been asked for ID when checking in digitally. But I suppose it could happen.
It might be worth using a travel agent. They can often book tickets and hold them without a name provided until later
I think it depends on the airline, type of ticket etc etc. I know with some you can change the name, but it will cost you, but it might be worth calling the customer support lines and asking, and asking for email confirmation of what they've told you or if there's info somewhere on their website and go from there
Just use two different names (pick one, or use a siblings name).  Check in before you get to airport. Email boarding pass to which ever freind your taking. Screen shot the boarding passes and use the photo to check-in just incase email doesn't work.


 No one ever checks ID on domestic so it will be fine.
Read the details of the particular ticket you buy
They vary on flexibility and cost 
A cheap ass flexi ticket will charge you <$14,000 to change a a name

A slightly more expensive ticket will charge $11,000 to change name 


And so fourth
My name? Bloggs. Joe Bloggs.
I have. They were checking everyone. Sometimes they do, sometimes they don't.
Domestic can often only be held for 24hrs, at least that was the case when I was an agent a few years ago.

And a name is still required to hold seats so it’s a similar end result.
I’ve only ever had my ID checked to get a paper boarding pass. If you check in online and use an electronic pass, I’ve never seen it checked and I fly regularly.

Not sure of the wisdom of flying under someone else’s name. They can be pretty serious about regulations with aviation, so the penalties might be quite serious, even if the risk of getting busted is very low.
Wonder if they were looking for someone. Cause I reckon I've done 70 flights in the past 5 years and haven't been checked once
I was checked yesterday when checking in through the counter (online wasn’t working for some reason). They asked for ID rather than booking ref etc to check in
