My 10yo daughter just said that AFL is just an excuse for guys to get hugged. It made me ponder that the ones we extol as the best are the ones that either hug the most, or get hugged the least. I thought this is an interesting look at masculinity in Australia.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
 Not at all. AFL is where one man attempts to play the entire world of beethoven on his whistle while 36 slender gentleman perform majestic leaping ballet in the background in order to distract him.
Just wait until she discovers brazillian jiu jitsu.
What do the AFL and Russia have in common? Zero openly gay men.
I always tell my mates I love them. Have always regretted not saying so when a few have passed.

Found out a few days ago a guy I'd chat with randomly online had died. He had been super kind to me when I was in a bad place. 

We didn't chat much, but we'd send the occasional meme and ask how shit was.
I checked Instagram, and the last messages we sent to each other started with him saying that he loved me, and my last message was saying that I loved him too. It made me oddly happy :)
Wait until she hears about BJJ. It's only gay when one of us comes. Oss.
Yeah most guys either need to play some sort of contact sport or be drunk or high enough to be able to hug a mate or tell them they love them. I don't have that problem if I love my bro's I tell them I hate toxic masculinity and I'm the first person to break down those barriers. For God sakes fellas it's ok to express how you feel and ask you're mates if they're doing ok we don't need to be big macho men all the time. Maybe if we all let our mates know that we genuinely give a shit about them and they can talk to us at any time about anything guys would stop holding everything inside until they kill themselves. So fellas take the time today to check in on your mates please
This reminds me of a Barbara Kruger artwork - a picture of a group of men rough-housing at a wedding with text overlaid:  

_You construct intricate rituals which allow you to touch the skin of other men_
She has a point. AFL is pretty gay.
Shes kind of right. The comrade-re and physical expression, celebrating, hugging etc.. are not common place in a lot of male lives. Sports in general enable this stuff in an "acceptable" way.
My cousin used to play community football and always put kisses on the end of his Facebook comments and so did his friends xx xx Also remember how football players would tap each others butts? I don watch footy (a middle age woman with no interest in it). This affection amongst footy men is purely affection and friendship - and yep who wouldn’t like a hug 🤗
Eh the whole contact sports is gay thing is immature at best and homophobic at worst. Her being a 10yo girl gives her a pass, but the rest of this comment section is still on that highschool shit
I kiss and hug my boys often and try not to leave them for work without doing it. Never do I want them to think that they aren’t the most important people in my life.
Yeah it's fucking dire. Touch-starvation is rampant and it *fucks you the hell up*. Like, just go watch some chimps for a bit; the amount of personal contact you see happening is about the same as what we need.
Your 10 year old is parroting what she heard someone else say.
I think to play at that level of football you would need to lower any reststance to touch in general. For the two hours you're on the field getting probably the odd accidental swipe from others in the fray, there's a lot more hours spent with trainers and physios showing you correct form and working on those niggling injuries and soreness. These people can be male or female, so I'm not sure how much a gay AFL player would enjoy that any more than a straight one. So I doubt anyone would work that hard to make it to the top level for just that reason.
I would like to have a sport where I am hugged, I have missed human touch since my husband died. A hug can be important to a lonely person.
I think people tend to overanalyse these types of things and fail to recognise that playing footy is just pure dumb fun.
My mate and I used to do our own commentary and say 'oh, he's going in for the cuddle!' Etc.
Absolutely not a dig at the child, just a reminder of an interaction I had the other day with a grown woman.

Am I the only one that is a bit sick of the homosexual innuendo attached to every male activity that involves touching while also being told I shouldn't be afraid to show affection to other men? I'm definitely not afraid to show affection. I hug friends and family all the time. I'm just sick of hearing about this bullshit.

Masculinity in Australia is being told you aren't a man if you don't play sports, then being told by the same person (mostly women in my experience) that the sport I play is homoerotic overcompensation because it involves touching and short shorts, and then being told I'm toxic for telling them I don't care about their opinion and they should pull their head in.

I am lucky in that these people aren't my actual friends. Just friends of friends I never really have to deal.
In the 90's my school struggled to put an AFL team together because the kids all knew it as gAyFL.

Whatever the state of masculinity is today I will say that it is an improvement on the old school.
I’ve never been touched so much by men than when I was I working in a kitchen.
We hug in moments of triumph, it's part of the Esprit de Corps that exists by living in that moment. Can't force it to happen, the vibez have to be resonating within the fraternal brotherhood of man. The fact we don't hug each other often is what lends it it's power when the moment is right.


Maybe it's a guy thing.
I mean, you’re frowned upon if you don’t open shower with the rest of the team, post-match, so there’s that.
At any single point, sports is a microcosm for society.
Don’t tell her about the end of season celebration where it’s tradition that one of the players dresses in drag !
I quit playing footy when all the boys started showering together and putting fingers up asses for a joke.

It goes deeper than masculinity ahahahahahahaahahaha
I read once that movies where men hug, and show true joy at being together are more uplifting to most audiences because we don’t always see it in real life. 

Think Shawshank Redemption ending.
It sounds like me your daughter is just picking up on passive homophobia at school or something.
I'm just here for the use of the word extol.
https://www.foxsports.com.au/afl/womens-afl/afl-2020-womens-star-responds-to-bum-poke-furore/news-story/02c943a0414fb9c84c94ca7ad769c2ff

You don’t get this anymore, the 90s you could slap asses all day and no articles.  

I wish I could put my finger on when sports went soft on this, but I’m no Hopoate.
AFL IS 


“mucho competitive bullshit!” 


David Williamson

The Club


(Edit: actually this was before AFL even existed but you get the idea)
I do BJJ, there is something about being close with other people you dont know. As soon as you have had a good roll with someone there is a closer connection and friendship becomes easier. There’s definitely something positive about human connection. I recommend it for people having trouble making friends, as long as you go in with no ego and are willing to learn its a really positive thing. (Im also a straight married male)
"You construct intricate rituals that allow you to touch the skin of another man "

Barbara Kruger
Are you high?
I always find it hilarious that people bag women's sport as being full of lesbians, yet no-one mentions anything about the AFL... played by hundreds of fit young men in tight shorts, all bathing, showering, massaging together etc, with supposedly nary a gay person among them!
Nothing quite like watching men play grab arse in a field.
Always hug my mates. Life is too short to not show love. I also don’t need external validation in my masculinity so me and my shitbox Camry just cruise around singing random shit on the radio.

Gen Z / Alpha perspectives on friendship and masculinity on the whole seem to be moving in a better way so that’s a nice thing. Next generation has a lot more invested in their mates and it shows.
This is pretty funny, OP, ya weirdo.
She's got a point. There are not many sports where blokes pat each other on the bum.
Damn, I thought this was going to be a point at how a lot of Australian men try beef up their masculinity because they're really just insecure..
I'm a transmasc teacher so I have a weird experience of masculinity in this country. I've discovered the beauty of healthy masculinity in the last few years, I've cherished making connections with my male relatives and ancestors. At the same time I see the worst side of toxic masculinity in the way teenage boys act towards each other and especially towards women/girls and anyone outside the binary. Anyone thinking there's no problem with misogyny in this country need only work with teenage boys to have that proven wrong.
AFL is a pretty hardcore sport. I feel like it’s just cool now days for girls/women to put masculinity down by saying such things as ‘it’s just an excuse for guys to get hugged’ or guys that drive massive cars have small dicks. So we can’t enjoy anything masculine anymore or we’ll get scrutinised or ridiculed for it?
Well they do start of every game by running through a banner.
Lucky she isn't watching baseball. With all that slapassth
What the?
MotoGP in that case is just for riders to get a pat on the arse.
As a kid I used to hate Rugby League because it just felt like an excuse to punch each other. I swear every game I saw would always end up in a brawl
Same reason I hated AFL growing up. Now I love it, and I see the joy of my son playing it and bind as we go to games together.
Little brother of my mate in school did dancing and copped a bit of "gay" for it and he came back with the best line... "I'm dancing with 20 girls. You're playing footy with 20 boys. Who's the gay one?"
IF AFL is just an excuse for guys to get hugged THEN what is AFLW?
haha, that's such a fascinating angle to view it. Your daughter is so perceptive. :)
AFL is just for the tradies that ‘made it’
Jeez, 10 years old, and she's already receiving toxic ideas about men and masculinity.
You should probably find some decent men for her to start listening to more often so she learns how to understand and interact with the opposite sex.
Bro you shouldn't be getting high if you're meant to be looking after a 10 year old.
Rugby is the same...
The sports are broken down depending on your kink:

AFL - twinks

Rugby league/union - bears

MMA - intimate 1 on 1 erotic hugging
She's not wrong.

It's kinda sad that men have to be involved in sports in order to have socially acceptable physical interactions with other men. A hug, a hand on a shoulder, even a pat on the bum, all need to be more socially acceptable outside of sporting situations.
We actually discussed this at university -- the 'homoeroticism' that can be seen safely exchanged between ultra-macho males (we looked at AFL and the movie Top Gun -- go back and watch the first scene between IceMan and Maverick during the flight lecture).  
In AFL you often see men lying on top of each other for a few loonnng extra seconds before climbing off, ass slapping and embraces. The theory was that it's "safe" for them to do it, because no one would EVER dare question a 6'4" testosterone-pumped Australian bloke's sexuality or gender identity.
I always found afl and basketball strange with them tapping each other on the arse after goals
Making up elaborate excuses to touch other men and have it not be gay is the cornerstone of western masculinity. I personally would rather sports just embrace it ❤️
Agreed, I've thought of a while that both AFL and ARL are homoerotic
Redditors hate masculinity for some reason. So many misandrists on here
I’m from Europe. In English speaking circles there are only 2 groups of modern day men who have felt the need to ‘reassure’ that there aren’t gay when they do things such as their own laundry  and that’s republican Americans and Australians. In the balkans I have found some similar attitudes.
Australian men would rather blow their brains out than go to therapy.
Super gay
Omg I hate football. It brings out the yobbos
Maybe take a moment to reflect on how you're bringing her up and who she's socialising with if she's never seen two guys hug in an everyday situation.
Intricate rituals designed to touch the bodies of other men….. can’t remember who to attribute that quote to but it’s stuck with me for decades
[deleted]
GayFL - the game where they’re all “totally str8”
This is so poetic, even the most noble of Chinese nobles would shed a tear reading this.
Exactly not all heroes are in the closet..they can be flamboyant too lol.
Jesus Christ... Can I steal this?
I think this is possibly my favourite ever comment
BJJ is just learning to fold the washing with people still inside it
"It's only gay if you make eye contact"
Olympic Greco-Roman Wrestling 
I know! I used to walk past a jiu jitsu studio on my way to work, one with a big glass window. Watching those big guys tussle at 8 am. It's enough to make a woman blush
I start bjj when I was 38yo. I quit it on the first month. I felt totally uncomfortable with the hugging on the ground 😅 I don’t blame the sport or judge the people who like it, I am just not made for it :/
A lot more women are doing it now.
Soon it will be one big swingers hug-fest.
I’d watch MMA if the male combatants wore bikinis and they covered the octagon with mud.
gi or no gi 'cos the gi forms a thick barrier?
Slightly off topic but can you imagine how awful it would be for the poor person whose the first to come out. They'll definately get death threats and who knows what else. 


If a single player chooses to come out I hope a group come out at the same time to at least diffuse some of the hatred they will face. 
I don't follow AFL but that's pretty shit. Ian Roberts in the NRL came out in the 90's.
Funnily enough one of my old teachers told me a story about an ex AFL player who he knew. The player came out as gay and actually joined the Australian Tenors or something like that.
This. 

I grew up in NZ. So contact sport, mainly rugby, is huge. 
It started at school. Where I found boys loclkerooms uncomfortable. Lots of slapping each other, standing around half naked etc.. Then the playing field. Mostly in scrums. Guys literally grabbing each other’s asses to push the scrum forward.

I found it all weird that so many boys and men really liked touching each other. 

When I called it out. I was immediately ostracised. So I quit sport. 

IMO most rugby, nrl, and afl, are closet homosexuals. 

Which is totally OK👍
It's basically aggressive cuddling.
BJJ isn't gay.

50/50 guard is a liiiittle bit gay
Touching is only practiced to express power in Anglo culture and shaking hands is an extension of that, generally been the only touching appropriate practiced between men.

Rugby union is a very social sport and not just about drinking and hanging out with your mates, in NZ it has taken over from church as a business network where people make connections and find work from word of mouth; an old boys club associated with Anglican college.

The term toxic masculinity is a term used by someone looking in from the outside such as a metropolitan journalist whose never been in a shearing shed and didn't go to the same school.
Human contact is vital for survival.
Maybe I should start paying attention to the footy…
[deleted]
what sport isn't 💀
Grow up, thinking the only reason men could have to touch each other is because gay is pathetic.
Could be...
Good mark rubs your shoulders
Good kick slaps your bum
Kick a goal group hug with bum slaps
Oh so that's why lots of school kids called it GayFL growing up
And I rather enjoy watching a sport where sweaty men in hot pants and vests pile on top of each other
Maturing is realising that the Bont is sexy as hell and that thinking that is ok
Oh the butt slaps of encouragement….
Obviously a Thugby League fan
> comrade-re

…camaraderie?
It's pretty common with my close mates, we broke down the initial barrier with MDMA use in our youth and don't feel weird hugging each other and showing affection.
I actually think it is the purest form of male affection. My son has just started playing AFL, and I love the fact that the coach is always pushing the whole, these people are your team, and many of them will be your life long friends.
That girl didn't say gay though, she just said it's an excuse for hugs, and in Australian culture maybe it's true that some men appreciate the (ideally) non-violent physical contact with other men that comes with contact sports. Not necessarily on a sexual level -- body contact is much more common in other cultures. I think in Australia we have a masculinity or homophobia issue that holds back much contact, and i think humans need it.
Because most of this sub hates sportsball.
But she wasn't calling them gay.
Actually couldn’t believe what I was reading lol hadn’t heard that shit since high school
Except you’re the one who’s equated men hugging with men being gay. 10 year old didn’t say that.
Yeah, the way a lot of commenters talk about it makes it sound like some poorly conceived homo-erotic fan fiction.
It's clear they have no knowledge of team contact sports, so they eroticise it to fill in their lack of understanding and then throw in some casually sexist attitudes of men to round it out and hide their lack of understanding behind faux social science intellectualism.
Didn't know I needed it until I realised I never got it.
Mate, I’ll hug you! I hug all my mates.
When Dennis would say “He can’t find a man!” we’d back it up with “Maybe his standards are too high!”
> The fact we don't hug each other often is what lends it it's power when the moment is right.

This is a great point. My close friend is on the spectrum, hates to be touched, but maybe once a year we'll hug or shake hands or whatever, and it's great moment that expresses the deepness of our friendship.
She would love that. The only reason we could get her playing sports at all was if the uniform was cute.
I really don't think it was meant in a homophobic way. I think what she does pick up on is that every time her and her friends meet, they hug, whereas boys her age and her brothers age, stand there and act cool. The thing she loves more than anything else is the rare occasion her brother hugs her.
I do BJJ as well and I think this is more about the competitive/friendly contest aspect than the physical contact. 


Also the trust aspect, someone can literally have your life or ability to function in their hands, and when they let go after you tap, you automatically feel safer with that person.
I play softball badly, but after decades of pretty my only human contact being family, it was great to get in a huddle with a bunch of blokes after winning a game.
You need at least a little lubrication to watch the Eagles this year.
Uhhh I'm not sure what you're saying here, the "stereotype" of lesbian sportswomen is that they're masculine not feminine so why would you suggest that male athletes are dismissed as all behaving homosexually?
I thought so too. I post very little, and it was my daughter who made me laugh enough to post this.
Shhhhh they don’t like it said out loud
Ancestors?
A chance for women to get hugged?!?
Well said Damo.
I actually think she is on the money. It is funny 50% of the responses have been that afl is gay, and 50% have been guys need to hug more.
Nah, When you have kids, that's when you need to get high the most. 
what you on.

MMA is the most hardcore and masculine of them all.
Like all of them you reckon?
That is great insight. I felt living overseas was an amazing opportunity to look from the outside in.
She sees that every time one of my male friends or family come around. I think it is more about her young peers.
Someone Kruger. Someone else dropped that in, and I think it is fantastic.
I think you misinterpret what masculinity is.
No, you don't have permission to use this guy's Reddit comment. If you do you will be served a cease and desist letter.
AKA involuntary yoga. Or combat cuddling. 
No wonder the strawweight women in UFC are amazing talented at BJJ. 50kg women still folding clothes with their 120kg husbands in it.
> Olympic Greco-Roman Wrestling 


Obligatory Roy and HG

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n3lVvwMQx94&ab_channel=AlbertLanger
i grew up doing BJJ and i’m now realising that it’s probably the reason i’m so okay with being touched. just used to it.
If you were just laying on the ground hugging, then that's not BJJ.
That's just you paying to hug another man.
That's pretty much what Craig Jones does.
Yes, I'd imagine that's how it'll happen. Apropos, it's exactly why events like Stonewall were so pivotal - it's events like those that tend to drive collective action like that. Those gay players need to know they're not alone, be able to find each other, and decide to act together. Tough thing to do, that. Having allies helps, but only so much. The stakes are so incredibly high.
The media harassment would be worse than online trolls. Why should anybody need to make public who they fuck.
Will probably be the Swans
touch is not strictly sexual. your way of thinking is exactly the problem being referred to in this post
I'm not surprised you were ostracized
You were ostracised because you made something completely non sexual sexual. If you see a bunch of strong men touching each other in a scrum or getting changed in a locker room as gay well, maybe that's what you wanted deep down.
I grew up playing rugby and wouldn’t say there’s any sexual energy behind that behaviour other than taking the piss. ‘Most people playing those sports are in the closet’ is wild lmao. Very ignorant thing to say and very disrespectful to queers.
A woman is okay with other women touching her. She is not okay with women touching her. What’s the difference. 
What about when I have their back and whisper "I love you" in their ear while I am trying to choke them?
>Touching is only practiced to express power in Anglo culture 

I think you're doing it wrong.
Some people look at it that way, sure, but there's plenty of people who will hug their mates.

Also I don't think dapping up can be considered a power move, it's clearly a shared camaraderie
Nah me and my mates are all about that hug life!
Haha you nearly had me up until the last paragraph, I was literally going “who thinks like this” and then BANG “ahh they’re obviously taking the piss”
I enjoy that short shorts are the norm for men in Australia. 🤤
Eighteen naked AFL players in the showers at the Gabba
Brain rot. You’ve got serious issues if you think the only reason men could have to make physical contact is because they’re gay. Actually super homophobic and completely childish.
At least not when you compare it to that game invented by english private school boys where they are always putting their faces near each other's arses
it defo would attract closet gays but so would a boy's high school and any other arena where you'd find a sausage-fest. i'm looking at you, alan jones and others like him.

you look at someone like alexander volkanovski, he comes across as very non-gay and masculine and yet this guy went from playing rugby league and then into MMA. He found success in both but more in MMA.

This guy is simply an athlete and obviously loves to get physical and enjoys a rough and tumble, no matter what type of sport.

so i think you can be non-gay and just enjoy the physicality and challenge of say, wrestling, jiu-jitsu (described as chess using the human body), judo, etc. etc...
Jousting
The change rooms of most male dominated sports are the most homoerotic straight people places I have ever been in
Singles tennis? A good strategy is to stay away from people.
Group showers after the game
I bet you do!
Honestly a creative attempt at spelling.
r/BoneAppleTea
It's one of those moments where you think there's a pun, but you can't figure it out ...  ... No, srsly, guys, is it just he can't spell for shit or am I missing something?


Edit: He's got about 70 upvotes ... are they ironic?  Or can they not spell, either? Do you get points for trying?
Its almost like, auto correct doesnt always choose the right words ya bone heads.
>hugging each other and **showering** affection. 
Exactly the same. Did wonders for me when I was young
Nope that would be 69ing
That was my take on it as well. I also don't think her generation sees being gay as an issue in any way, shape, or form.  However, I think a lot of men misunderstand masculinity as being hard, unemotional, but funny, instead of being a societal norm that is changed by the way men in a society behave. I think we can already see this in our youth in a lot of sub-sections as the older generations question what previous generations' standards of masculinity are doing to men's mental health. 

As the father of a young boy and girl, one of the parenting comments in parenting books that stuck with me is that we need 4 hugs a day to survive, 8 hugs a day for maintenance, and 12 hugs a day for growth. I think in those areas sections of society where being hard is still an expectation of masculinity, that sports are a way for men to get the human contact they need.
I have always called it ‘skin hunger’. I mean, a long time lack of hugs and physical touching can really affect people and they probably don’t even know why they are sad, angry and feel so alone. Babies can die from it.
I mean that's the vibe of the post though, then just read every other upvoted comment

But even just thinking full contact tackling is equivalent to friendly hugging is incredibly uninformed. Again, I'll give a 10yo a pass on having a take like that
It is reddit after all.
Our house has always only been a MotoGP house
One of the most upvoted comments is saying that though
Did you read the rest of this thread?
Haha that’s funny !
Then by implication she's suggesting men are insecure about hugging each other and need a valid excuse.


I believe the kids today call this... *checks notes*... 'toxic masculinity'
Yeah for sure.
Yeah i think more males need it, i suffer bad depression and being apart of the bjj community has helped me immensely.
C'mon we had a decent win last night.
I'm not having a go at women's sport - There are a lot of 'macho' blokes who dismiss women's sport as just being played by a lot of lesbians - especially cricket or football, but those same people are totally oblivious to AFL where there are no openly gay players, despite the multitude of men playing the sport, and often 'homoerotic' behaviour of said players.  They refuse to believe that there would be gay guys playing their macho game, but will dismiss women's sport as 'just a bunch of lezzos'.
Sure, what's the problem?
😂
Glad someone got it 😅
Both could be true! I’m not saying they are but the two ideas are not mutually exclusive.
Methinks though dost protest too much
Yeah Aussie social culture feels like late 80s UK culture or something tbh it was a massive shock on the fragile/externally validated form of masculinity. 

and also man you guys love casual racism. Like a lot. Like even from educated people with good jobs. It’s pretty wild.  But that’s a separate issue all together.
[deleted]
In the criminal justice system, comment based offenses are considered especially heinous.
On Reddit, the dedicated detectives who investigate these vicious felonies are members of an elite squad known as the Special People’s Unit. These are their stories.
Cheers mate
My wife and her friends do Yoga and Pilates, I call those things 'BJJ without a purpose'.
As a Swans fan (well, I was until I got tired of football) and a bi dude, this is funny.
Swans can be gay (I assume you are referencing that ancient post)
I agree with your statement - the ostracised poster suggested a sexual aspect to otherwise non-sexual physical contact.

But I feel that the ostracisation (is that a word?) is pretty similar to what a gay (or assumed to be gay by their school peers) would experience. But in their case simply their existence is what is raising the question of if the physical contact sexual.

It is this unhealthy intersection between what is considered masculine and an inability to think about homosexuality without feeling that your masculinity is being attacked - that results in an entire sporting culture ends up with a unofficial don’t-ask-don’t-tell policy.

Disclaimer - my take is based on experience in primary school/high school in the 80s and 90s - I hope things have changed a bit since then, but know it isn’t flowing through to professional sports yet.
It's pretty telling that a thread about masculinity is about what is gay or not...
Haha sure. Like I said. I left playing sport early on. So you’re probably right. 
Disrespectful to queers? Yeh na.
It's a psyop, not gay
Australians are oblivious to their own cultural practices and talk too much smack, they're far more likely to pull out a knife when things go sideways.

You could try reading the post again but I don't think that will help you.
Looking for Prince Harry, Prince Harry’s butt.
“We’re not gay! He needed a prostate massage and only my cock could hit the spot.”
They wave giant dildos
Literally men getting railed
Just moved from juniors to seniors footy this year and that was the biggest shock to me
Surely autocorrect wouldn’t correct to a wrong word
He’s just mentioned his son (likely around the age of his 10y/o daughter) starting to play and you post that? Sicko
[deleted]
Yeah, and the post also has that whole: "My 3 year old just made a wise comment on metaphysical ideas of knowing and existence" bullshit. Like ok Sandra, are you sure you're not just using your kid to promote your own shitty political opinions.
Yeah I know, but the 10 yo wasn't. I feel like people are completely missing the comment she actually was making
It was good to see, I love an exciting game. I feel if the Eagles were better this year, Waterman would be a cert for the Coleman.
What sort of connections are you making with your ancestors?
I think the interesting thing for me is the way those who enjoy afl are just as telling. I noted that the ones we extol are the ones who hug the most, and those that get hugged the least, and with the comments, I believe it highlights the drastically different views of masculinity in Australia. 

GayFL, and the it's not fucking gay I will fuck you up mate, highlights the view that to be masculine in Australia you have to be hard or you are feminine. 

Then the flipside of that is the, we as social creatures need touch to survive, and the numerous people who posted and PMd me stating that they are starved of human touch and that it is affecting their mental health, or the I hug my mates and ask r u ok at every point because I don't want to see my mates top themselves and me having never reached out.

However, I don't really believe in these basic binaries and feel the truth is more of a spectrum.
I think that is changing especially in the corporate world, but the trades do still seem to love their racism.
Your inability to lol at this makes me lol and tear emoji.
DUN DUN
BJJ is just gay sex without the sex
Thanks bro I was just having a laugh because a few of my mates lusted after Capper back in the day 😂
Nah, yeah.
yea mate, it is
It's disrespectful. Source: I am queer.
You need a hug.
Touché
You're brave
impaled even
That may be true, but the majority of kids are on the "everyone is different, and that's ok" side of things.
Even then, tackling is nothing like affectionate physical contact
Yeah, the comment her parent was making is that men are inferior to women because they don't express and process their emotions like women do.
I think it's entirely reasonable for men to be fed up with the pathologising of their gender.
Shows that the white shorts are kryptonite to Gold Coast players. Qiute funny seeing how much help the AFL have given them to see they can't get above double figures of wins in a season and can't travel
Well I’m guessing it’s a spiritual one.
I absolutely love this question by the way. 

I think it’s relevant but I’m not 100% sure how but my exwife got really upset with me once when I said I would rather my then infant (now 13) son was gay than a rugby player. My view is probably due to being bullied by rugby players for being friends with gay guys in school.
I think it’s changing mostly on work hours. In social settings it’s very firmly there
No thank you.
Penetrated
I didn't read it as pathologising. More just pitty.
You are probably right. I work for a very forward thinking company that, in my area, has internalised the commitment to acknowledging and understanding the importance of first nations in our world. However, I have overheard the occasional despicable comment outside of work hours.
You pity the male experience because you see it as inferior to the female experience. Why else would you pity it.
I pity the male experience because in examples like these, men are limited by culture into not being able to express affection for friends for fear of being criticised, looked down on, or seen as gay. That's repression.
Culture limits its own understanding of the male experience because people like you don't value the male way of being. You think it's inferior, and that position is sexist, not sympathetic.
I don't think it's inferior, I think it's limiting. The fact that anything that goes against that norm is stigmatised is the issue.
