
It does bring up the point that the major issue is bed block IE ED is full and no ward beds are free to move stable people to free up ED beds no bed means hospitals can't take over care from paramedics
>South Australian public hospital patients have spent a record 5,539 hours ramped in ambulances as the health system continues to struggle with demand.
>
>"This is incredibly serious and is being dealt with incredibly seriously," Health Minister Chris Picton said.
>
>"At the moment, all of our beds are full."
>
>It comes as the code yellow — or internal emergency which led to the cancellation of elective surgeries — will cease across metropolitan hospitals on August 16 after it was announced in May.
>
>Ambulance Employees Association general secretary Leah Watkins has slammed that move, saying the decision to stand down the code yellow needed to be reversed when ramping was at its worst.
>
>She said more than 5,500 hours ramped was the equivalent of 15 ambulance crews unavailable every day.

But let’s not overlook the good news: /s


>Adelaide's home values rose another 1.7% in June, the second fastest pace of growth after Perth, taking the market by 15.4% or almost $103,000 higher over the latest financial year.

Source: https://propertyupdate.com.au/adelaide-housing-market-monthly-update-video/
I recently had to occupy a ward bed for serious issue where I didn't feel too bad - first stay 1 night, 2nd stay 1 week). In melbs though. 


 It's interesting being "very sick" in hospital but feeling better than when you have a head cold.


 Saying that, I kinda didn't want to go home after 2nd stay in case I had to waste ER resources again/ go through triage. 


 With my visits - first I lined up to be triaged for 45 mins with a pulminory embolism (head cold felt worse, so long as I could keep a low breathrate) - waited 4 hrs in ER after that for tests which contirmed and 2nd time 1 week later 30 mins lined up gor triage with a collapsed lung (resulted in a speedway into a ER bed as I had a can't breath attack while lined up) 


 ER seems to move so slow for how serious it can be I regret driving myself both times but i didnt wanna waste ambo resources.


 Sitting in ER scared with no idea what's happening in what time frame getting worse and worse with noone to talk to is scary - on first visit i had to line up again for 30 mins to say my breathing was getting worse due to pain. Yes, this paragraph contradicts me saying I wasn't that sick. I'm not good at knowing when I'm unwell.
