First Aussie swimmer to win 50m, 9th Gold for the games, 20th medal overall. 1st Aussie male to win gold this Olympics 

Unbelievable in the semis, even better run in the final. This was epic!
Fourth olympics, first gold to go with his three bronze

Sensational effort
I watched a brief story on his changed up training program. Pretty cool to see him win gold.

He dropped his pool training by 90% and focused on strength based training in other ways. 

What a result
The world's fastest physicist in the pool
[deleted]
Is that the first Australian male gold of the olympics?
Amazing. The emotion from the commentary as he wins will let you know just how much this would mean to Cam. He has worked so hard and deserves so much, but a 50m swim can be a coin toss in the heats let alone the final. Cam, you have created a moment of Australiana.
Loved Thorpie and Rooney's fan girling in the commentary box. Such a huge moment for Australia 
I remember meeting him about 6-7 years ago at a swim camp. He’s a class act.
50m freestyle sounds hard. I want a 20m freestyle
[First Male to win 50m](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DkKMpfNMcaU)

McKeon won the 50m freestyle at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics
Joining the women gold medalists….he can be an honorary Sheila! 
Love that he has achieved this after 4 Olympics and off the back of changing up his swim training regime - wonder if others will take notice?
Far out my heart was beating fast for that, great win
He didn’t even rap wtf
Stoked for him. Shared some classes with him and he's the most humble guy you'll meet. Super smart too.
Finally got a man up in the gold
Omg! A night (morning) of triumph in the pool! 🇦🇺
One for the Aussie blokes at last! What a guy!
Didn't get a great start either, might have gone sub 21 with a better start.
Paid for a stansport subscription and legit can’t find this replay anywhere. What a waste of money.
onya Cameron
Not cheated out of it this time Cam! 
      - _ -
Nips out for Cam!
Men rule!

hell yeah Cam
Brilliant stuff, so good to see an Aussie in front in the last 15m! The squealing in the commentary box was embarrassing though, zero professionalism.
A dolphin can probably swim faster
[deleted]
Whoop-de-fucking doo.
What an awesome way to top off your career. I always think it must be rough peaking young then struggling to replicate it in the following years, but he’s built upto this. 

Also has a degree in mathematics and physics. 

Dude is the next step in human evolution.
50m is an amazing achievement
Wow that's unbelievable!
He looks a little bulkier than the other swimmers.. He knows something we don't
I reckon he just changed swim training forever.
That would make sense for the 50m, for sure. Very clever strategy. Probably trading off competitive advantage in almost all other events to achieve it.
Could you link the story/video? Would love to watch it. Thanks!
Oi Oi Oi
Yes.
I think others have won gold
A lot of it is lane positioning and wakes
... giaan was squealing for the whole race, which is a new low for her commentary
> he can be an honorary Sheila! 

this sub fucking hates men for some reason.
Yeah but can they walk to the pool
Who are you, The Deep?
Kaufusi probably couldn't, despite the need-for-speed haircut.
Next games we should enter one
30 years is old? FML haha
bro called the just proven fastest man in the world slow lmao
Yeah but Dale dug a hole.
He says he is aiming to compete in Brisbane. 
Take a look at Ozymandius over here...
Being a scientist and an athlete must be so hard as well. An athlete largely builds on just an unrealistic sense of self, you know just pushing past the possible and believing in yourself against all odds. While the scientist is built on fact & Universal constraints.

 I think that's why so many athletes seem to be religious, believing in a higher power that achieves the impossible makes sense for a freak edge case high achiever.
I would love to do 50 m, right now I’m at the kitty paddling pool level. Kitty. Kiddy! Crikey, you see, if you don’t do exercise, you can’t even get your words straight, let alone your swim!
You have to be pretty switched on to get a degree in Physics and Maths. I'd imagine he's quite scientific and meticulous with his approach to training.
Yes he doesn't swim other events anymore.

But I could imagine designing a training regime with high intensity and low volume for other short distances as well.
Sure. 

11mins wide world of sports clip
https://youtu.be/0X4zA_WqnQw?si=PZ5MwwdVAFFIGMG4

More detailed Queensland academy of sport video 9 mins
https://youtu.be/cjg4NLueKrc?si=wkFjSQzuy27EYXAl
Oui Oui Oui.
Women carrying us hard.
If Giaan squealed for me whilst racing for the medal, I'd be pretty stoked.
Only short distances. They get out of breath easily
Bro
Council said they're not ok to be pets.
It's filling with water
Straight to the pool room
While the scientist is built on fact & Universal constraints.


Only for 101 science 
Heard an interview with him and he talked about being the scientist until he steps on the diving platform for the start of the race. Then he talks about art taking over. 

It was a fascinating listen. The dudes smart and knows science will only get him so far. I didn’t hear him mention religion, just letting his brain clear and being in the moment, sounds more like flow psychology than religion.
A shitton of serious scientists are also religious and always have been.

And a shitton of serious athletes design their training around rigorous evidence and careful, modest, diligent, incremental work.

I have no idea what meaningless dichotomy you're trying to establish here.
Plenty of religious scientists
Just dont cover up that bod with a lab coat
The speed needed to win a 50m at this level is insane
I think you're right.
Really appreciate that! Thank you!
Toilets are that way
damn so basically the women athletes took us all way to no 3 on the medal tally so far.
This dude gonna be celebrated so much harder 
Silly comment. Have you seen the level of competition the men have had to deal with?
Bro
Just ride it outside the environment
Indeed, real scientists grapple with universal mysteries.
I'm discussing the juxtaposition between an analytical mind pushing relentlessly to achieve the seemingly impossible.

 but someone who uses a big word like dichotomy probably would understand my point and instead of simply disagreeing jumped straight to being a wanker.
I know a bloke who studied physics and then theology before being a minister. It’s a fascinating mix. Smart bastard.
If you exclude men, we're topping the tally.
And he's very lucky he won it when the Men's Windsailing got delayed due to weather conditions where Grae Morris had a very great chance of winning the gold medal when it did. If it happened exactly when it was supposed to happen, Morris would been the first male Aussie to win gold this olympics.
Sorry, do you think it's easier for a woman to win a women's competition than it is for a man to win a men's competition? Given the same number of athletes?
Go look at who Kyle Chalmers lost to then come back and talk to me with you disparaging comments about our male swimmers
Celebrating the success of our female Olympians isn't disparaging the men.
