
Farmers find ways to reduce costs, cut out middle men, and families get a chance to show their kids where their food comes from and how much work that goes behind growing it.

Win for everyone!

...and when colesworth charge so much just to get massive profits for investors you might as well do the extra work to buy directly from the farmer yourself...
Last time I went to one of these they were more expensive than the super market.
Yeh I did this once. 
Cost was higher than supermarket and I did the work!! 
Would be great for the right price :)
Charge more and other people do all the work.

Genius.
Love freshly picked apples not just because of the taste and the crunch but damn it's good to eat one without a waxy layer
>By selling directly to the public, he said it cut out "dealing with the middlemen" and eliminated packing charges.

>"But you're dealing direct with people and allowing people to have really fresh produce."
We normally go apple and cherry picking once a year, it's a fun experience. Normally get a apple/cherry pie and coffee and collect a few kg 
“Farmers find way to reduce labour costs”.
[deleted]
Unless you're driving to a country farm in a zero emissions vehicle, the carbon emissions per piece of fruit would be huge.  
Similar to people who used to drive around to collect plastic bread ties to recycle to save energy.
We have a few pick your own places around Hobart and it’s always great to take the little guy. Awesome way to get fruit if you can manage
> show their kids where their food comes from

A reduction in alienation from the processes of production is a really good thing.

Makes people less inclined to think money conjures up products like buildings popping out of the ground in Command and Conquer and more likely to ask inconvenient questions like "where is the metal going to come from? [if we plan to have a green transition AND continue business as usual]".
5 bucks for 7 more than likely disgusting strawberry from Coles or $15 and i get a to pick a considerable amount of fresh sweet as fuck strawberrys and actually support a true blue local business? Its a no brainer
There was a berry farm outside Orange which used to be a bargain but after a few years it was dearer than the supermarket as you say, so we stopped going. I remember a staff member complaining to me about the prices going up.
Yeah, when I was in Canada it was basically pay a cheap entry and take as much as you can carry. Looked into it here and your basically paying them to be a farm labourer
And no doubt they can sell at a far higher rate than selling to the super markets, mind you the volume would be much lower so you still need the labour costs to get the remainder of the fruit for the supermarket volume
Typically they open to the public after professional pickers have gone through the field, so it’s just cream for the farmers.
GST doesn't apply to fresh fruit.
I only know the strawberry place up in the coal valley (as well as the blueberry place and the strawberry / raspberry place outside of Launceston). 

What else is there? My kid loved Hillwood (I think?) when we were there last summer.
There are a couple of places in the Huon Valley that do it from time to time. Names escape me for the moment
