I live about 200m from a typical suburban Aussie pub. You probably never been there but you’d know it pretty well. Public bar out the front, small gaming room with Keno and a few pokies out the back and a bistro overlooking a kids playground. The bistro was never in danger of winning a Michelin star but always produced a decent pub feed at a reasonable price and had an $15 lunch special every day for Nanna on her way home from bingo.

Like many places they shut the kitchen and bistro down during COVID and it remained shut for quite a while after. Any enquiries about when the bistro would reopen were met with ‘we’re refurbing the whole place soon’. Fair enough, it was starting to look a bit dated.

A couple of years ago, the hoardings went up and everything except the public bar out front was closed. The refurb took longer than everyone was expecting, but that’s an issue with the whole construction industry rather than this project in particular. So last month when the ‘grand reopening’ banner went up there was a bit of buzz around the neighbourhood. It’s been a few years and people were looking forward to a Friday night feed watching the footy. There was a subtle clue on the banner that I didn’t realise hinted at what the redevelopment really was all about – “Now open until 4am everyday”.

The public bar is basically unchanged with a few more TV’s on the wall to turn it into a sports bar. But the kitchen, bistro and gaming room have all been combined into one giant gaming area with dozens and dozens of poker machines. The pokies now take up about 75% of the total floor area of the pub. The kids playground is still there, but now has a laminated A4 piece of paper stuck on the fence with gaffa tape saying the playground is permanently closed.

I just wanted to eat a schnitty, drink a pint and watch the footy on the big screen and instead now I have a mini casino full of pokies pumping out human misery from 10am to 4am every day. 

Turns out, the ownership changed hands just before COVID. Can you guess who bought it?
I am so glad we don’t have the pokies everywhere here in WA. They seem to be a real blight.

Don’t get me wrong - the pub scene in most suburbs around Perth is dire, it’s over an hour’s walk from here to the nearest one. But at least when you get there, you’ve got a decent bar area, good pub food, a couple of screens for the sports for those that want it and no flashing lights and chimes of pokies.

Is it weird and monopolistic that the only place you can play them is Crown? Yeah sure. But at the same time it keeps things contained and I reckon most of us are in favour of that.
Pokies also destroyed live music
ALH I bet.

It’s a telling sign all over the suburbs.

The other one I see is pubs a bit dated getting refurbished and going upmarket and charging $30 for an average schnitty and $9 for a schooner that used to be $6.
I live in a small city of 100,000 people out east and most of the pubs in town have been brought up by three hotel conglomerates. 

These groups standardise everything about the pubs. They take no risks so every pub has the same beers, almost identical menus and very similar facilities and looks. 

They're all fine enough but pubs with their own individual character and specialities are increasingly rare. 

We've still got a couple that are family owned and operated so that's where I'm spending my dollars.
I was recently in London. Apparently, I'm told, when the London pubs lost indoor smoking, they chose to pivot to better food instead of other options like gaming machines. Now they are basically a bunch of gastro-pubs of various quality, catering to everything from the cheap schnitty crowd to the fancy pie and veg with wine list crowd. In my brief time there, they were great! Much better than strolling into the typical suburban pub masquerading as keno and pokies venue you get here.
Posts like this make me so glad that pokies aren't a thing in WA (outside of the casino). Every time I go to a pub over east I find the 'gaming area' to be gross and depressing. It's a shame that your pubs are being ruined like that.
Yar it’s all being corporatised.   Remember being a kid going to RSL’s with my grandparents, thinking I would really love to utilise these places once I did my time in the military.  They even had their pokies then, but they were out of the way.  Now I am on the flip side, done my time, and they’re nothing like the used to be with their gaming, and max profit ideology.  Sadly, the little country ones unable to compete remain permanently closed now. 

I live regionally, and there’s still a few independent harsh pubs around which haven’t been gentrified or corporatised too much.  While I’m quite comfortable in them, then tend not to be too family friendly.  Some still have a dining section that hasn’t been upgraded since the 60/70s…and yes, it is tired and old, but has its charm XD 
I'll be honest, I'm never going to spend my time in a venue with pokies.
I really wish the government would lower the tax on alcohol served at a venue. 

I'd love to go out more but $10 a beer is just too much
I am in Melbourne. I grew up in the best live band scene in the world. 

Now my son is in a band which is very popular but I hear a lot of his peers who can't afford to go see him play. 

The pubs are closing down because the residents are complaining about the noise and the cost of a drink or two is too much for a lot of his young friends.

I am sad.

 I have lived in other countries and was always proud of our music scene, but now I am watching it dying.
Pokies are a plague and any proprietor who has them is a parasite of the worst sort.



There's still a few pubs around ADL that don't have 'em. It's hard to overstate how much better they are in every way.
Say what you want about Merivale, at least they're consistently a disappointment.
Move to WA. Their pubs are pokie free, have great bistros and sometimes even live bands!
When a fucking parmi is 25 30 bucks when they put it on the fucking chips, and a suit salad. Fucking schooie getting up around the 10 dollar mark. Go fuck yourselves.
All my goto working pubs have been sterilised. They close down for renovations, then suddenly when they reopen you're blasted with pokies, bad acoustics, and a burger with a brioche bun that justifies the $20 asking price. There is nowhere left to go, and that's why I buy a case of beer and sit alone at home sad. I feel like I'm the only person who misses the pub. I know there are others like me, but they're probably at home drinking alone themselves.
When i was a lad around 1993. Pibs were amazing. Everyone knocked off for lunch on Friday, every oub had happy hours and tonnes of live music.

You could go to all sorts of venues, sub cultures, music and food every where.

However l remember platters of free food on friday arvos at standard pub to keep everyone on an even keel.

It was incredible.

And then the politicians killed it. Slowly but surely they choked to unconsciousness.

To this day they stand there next to the twitching shadow of the former pub scene, firmly holdibg that pillow down, trying to suffocate the life out it.

I will never forget or forgive what they have done to this country.

The young kids have no idea what they've missed out on
This is clearly over East because we are thankfully pokies free for the moment here in Perth, but the biggest cause of this as I see it is the corporate buy up of so many pubs.

A corporate owner just doesn't understand how to make a pub the centre of the community, they are just about making money.
I worked in a similar pub and the locals always complained that it was such a waste, and they where right from a "local pub" standpoint. The venue used *maybe* 20% of the total space, there where 4 function rooms that where almost never used, althe main bar was only open to  about 10pm, the bistro made decent food but was only open for about 6 hours a day and would consider it a busy day if they sold 30 meals in total. The place was a ghost town except for the gaming room.

The locals and staff where always asking about bringing in live music, poker nights, karaoke, pay per view (we didn't even have foxtel so you couldn't even watch the footy most nights) literally *anything* to bring more people through the door and make the place feel a bit more alive. I was speaking to the licensee about it and he said he raised it to upper management and they explained why they refused to do anything about it.

Basically, they would not funnel a single cent into the place unless it was absolutely  nessesary u till the pokies room stopped making money. If they started to introduce things like bands and footy and what not, it brings in more punters, but mainly drinkers rather than gamblers. Your average drinker might buy 5 drinks and meal, maybe more, but it took hours to make any kind of money off them, even if they where spending heaps on drinks. Then yoy have to add in the extra headache of trouble caused by drink dick heads, means extra security, means more bar staff, more kitchen staff etc etc. For the amount of profit you make from a drinker in a whole night of drinking and partying you could make in 20 minutes from a "platnium" player (people playing $10 hits on pokies)
Bringing in more dirnkers also scares off your regular players (your main cash cows.) 
This pub was one of the highest earners in the region and it only 2-3 staff and one security for thr whole night. 

Pokies are absoultey killing the local pub and it sucks, I am greatful to be away from that soul sucking industy
I live in the same suburb as a major premiership winning footy team.

You've probably heard of them, they're pretty big news the last few years.

They've got a huge building (and I do mean massive) that also hosts other entertainment acts, and many fancy resteraunts.

Now, all of this would be OK (if a far cry from the local pub, even tho is is my local) ... but in the *middle* of the bloody space, dominating EVERYTHING is a big *"over 18s only"* gambling experience.

You HAVE to go past it to visit 80% of the entire space, including dedicated children's soft play areas.

It's in your face, lights and sound and all the works, and you can only escape it if you hide in another venue behind their own music.

I absolutely hate it.
ALH and AVC own a ton of pubs everywhere and neither company cares about pubs beyond pokies revenue. Venue Managers see their position as a stepping stone to corporate jobs instead of being an end career, where one becomes a community fixture. 

This creates staff turnover, decreasing the chance of a long term plan to increase customer bases and leads to the corporations tripling down on pokie revenue wherever they can. 

Only support pubs owned by people.
This has been happening since the 90's in VIC.
Used their JobKeeper payments to buy more pokies so they can fleece the locals and not actually employ anyone. Taken from the Australian Pub Manual.
>Turns out, the ownership changed hands just before COVID. Can you guess who bought it?

ALH, Endeavour or AVC?
Carrington bar and grill in WA is a textbook example of how to revive a dwindling tavern. Love that place so much. Used to be a hole now it's some of the best feeds and vibes around. But doesn't have the gastropub vibes. Still a humble establishment. And the owner often will serve you your food or come and ask how it was. Super nice guy. Can't recommend it enough.
Just what us downtrodden peasants need, more dangling carrots in our faces to prey on our hopes of escaping the economic and cost of living shit show.
East coast issue
Regional town, SA.

1 pub

Family owned, 3rd generation.
It's the hub here, with birthdays, weddings, funerals, has it's own social club, footy tipping, pool comp etc.
Great kitchen.
A pet camel in the backyard.
Live music.
I think there's some pokies out the back somewhere.

Best part is that there's always someone there to say G'day or hang shit on you as you walk in.

Worst part is that the beer evaporates.
No sooner you buy one and it's gone and time for a refill.

Must be that global warming I keep reading about.
Thankfully I live in Frankston where there’s an intersection that has a pub on each of its 4 corners
My local just closed and never reopened :'(
My favourite pubs are the ones with comfy food, a (QUIET) sports game to watch if you're on your own (football, cricket, ice hockey, whatever the locals are into) and occasional events for Big Games (FIFA, Olympics, Grand Final Night, etc). I enjoyed a wonderful roast lunch at an English pub with red carpets and wood-paneling on the walls, and I've enjoyed one hell of a schnitty at a Melbourne pub with a flagstone beer garden out the back and live music after 7:30pm. I've honestly contemplated just making the local lawn bowls club my regular just because it has better vibes and scenery than the corporate 'hotel bars' that are standard fare at the moment. 

If I couldn't share a cosy early dinner with my gran there, it's not really a 'pub' vibe anymore.
Agree I hate the pokies/gaming it is so sad and depressing! I wish VIC would bring in similar laws to WA that they can’t be anywhere except the casino. I would go as far as to say gambling advertising should also be illegal - no different from laws banning advertisements of cigarettes
Maybe this is just a QLD problem, but it feels like  until recently, most pubs were run off the back of massive amounts of drink driving
Pub near me still has a pretty good restaurant 
Down the road from a uni, 200m 
In Brisbane

It's owned by Coles worth 

Talk to the manager they don't want bands or people there, happy for people having a punt on Saturday and people playing pokies all hours 

Bands uni students etc require security and break things 

It's a disgrace..place could have students in mon to Fri plus whatever on weekends 

Easier to make money from pokies
I used to fucking LOVE pubs. Country pub tour, yes please. Inner city pub crawl, YES!


Now you go into another refurbed pub and it looks nice, but it only takes a few moments for it to dawn upon thee, that it has zero personality and no fucking soul. 


It's another copy and paste sterile pub like thing, with the same fucking boring beers on tap. 


I'm kinda of done with it, it's getting  harder to find venues with a bit of soul and something about them.
Was it endeavour/alh?


Or VRC?
Enshitification!
Open to 4am, ALH
All my locals with pokies have them in a separate area, so you still get the local pub/bistro experience without the grossness of the pokies. 

To get a good feed steer clear of anywhere with pokies imo
Although there are a few of those types of pubs, there are plenty of great pubs in the northern Melbourne suburbs for drinking standard and craft beer and good pub food without pokies
Money.
My pub which is the local institution tried this shit. Everyone left and they were so deep in they reversed everything to get the locals back. And they came back but it was an excellent example of people power. The place was always rocking on a weekend and Friday night and had a good afternoon crowd and never had any trouble but the owners got greedy and almost blew the lot.
My local pub went to shit 30+ years ago. They got rid of the play area, it used to have its own small building that served drinks and packets of chips along with a pie oven. A video rental shop got built.

Next the bistro and family lounge/bar went. And what was the ladies lounge became the pokie area. Cant even get a hot meal anymore, not even a pie.

So i go to the next town that has a great feed at a great price, only problem is they dont put the footy on the Tv's in the Dining area
Fucking pokies
I hate pub culture but pokies are cancer.
My suburb used to have a local. The bar was a peninsula, with harmlessly tribal 'sides' that certain groups of otherwise identical middle aged white men drank on. There was a dining room that hadn't been used in years, since the kitchen shut ages ago.
It was fantastic and had a pretty loyal crowd. Now it is a McDonald's.
We have 3 pubs in my country town. One is closed all year apart from during a local music festival. The attached bottle-o makes a fortune through the year.

The second is fine but has all the charm and character of a dome coffee shop. The menu has only gotten shorter and there are no substitutions allowed to the point that if the item comes with wedges you can’t ask for chips instead. They also don’t have any chilli flakes or Tabasco if you wanted to add some to, for example, a pizza. 

The third has bounced in and out of a few managers but is now run by people who charge $18 for 4 tiny arancini balls, or 3 tiny chicken satay sticks and FORTY FIVE DOLLARS for a steak. This is generally felt to be shockingly expensive but the place is still packed most nights.

I just want a decent boozer with well priced food with a tiny bit of atmosphere. It’s clearly too much to ask for.
WA peeps - we get it, no need to post about no pokies there again when there's already 10x posts with the same point.
Cambridge tavern at Fairfield 4 years ago and a steak chips and salad was $10, it was literally 2 rump steaks and a massive plate of chips and salad. 

I’m sure it was funded by the zombies, junkies from the knock shop next door and money launderers all pumping big dollars into the pokies but to me that is what a pub meal is all about a good cheap feed to get people through the door
Between the Pokies, Taxes, Drink driving fears and Over zealous government regulation the traditional pub is dead in the water. I personally (even though I work in the industry) loathe going to pubs that have their main reason for being there as the pokies and everything else is secondary. It’s in the damned name -Hospitable’ - Hospitality! If the place isn’t hospitable it isn’t a nice place to be.
bear gullible somber one deserve support late roof judicious chunky

 *This post was mass deleted and anonymized with [Redact](https://redact.dev)*
I’m really sorry to hear that. My local pub is about 500m down the road, maybe less, and we’re lucky that whilst yeah there is a small number of pokies the playground and the bistro is very much open. Same with all the pubs around my town.
$8.50 schooners will do that.
Lemme guess - NSW?
Super glad most actual pubs in victoria have absolutely no interest in ruining themselves with gambling.
Exactly the same situation at my local pub. 'Renos' 'main bar now open till 4am', new pokies, bistro 'coming soon' forever. Just looks seedier now, and not in a good way.
(Not the same pub as mine doesn't have a playground)
ALH or the Coles one
wanted to say the sackville?, but i already know it not
This isn't just suburban pubs but pubs in regional towns too. Absolute blight on society. How do people not realise that those machines are literally built to take your money.
From the days ppl settled Australia alcohol was the driving force behind everything. Literally it was money. These days most of that money is taxes. Pokies have come and also been taken out of the better pubs in Melb but the cost of food went up by double when they pulled them out.
Death of third places is a real threat to society. 

There are no more gathering places for people to gather and enjoy themselves.
But the pokies subsidise the prices of food and drinks though, just like clubs!  
/s
Reading between the lines, this must be NSW. I have noticed in my travels throughout that state how horrible of an issue this is.
Indians are buying up all the country pubs, servos and veggie shops. The blueprint for pubs is "sports bar and lunch curry" and upstairs is long term tradie accommodation.
> Can you guess who bought it?


Buyie McBuyerface?
I'm not gonna miss them. So many pubs with shit fried food shit salad bar. People don't want that anymore, adapt or die.
I genuinely don't think about gambling, I see the occasional ads and tab, but I can't imagine living with it in my face all the time 
We may not have pokies but a lot of our pubs are losing their character through renovation. I don't know if it's one corporation in particular but they're so sterile and plain feeling. Give me sticky carpet and dark corners!
Came here to say that. Thank god we don’t have pokies in WA.
The reason for this is a law was enacted a long time ago to prevent gambling due to the amount that was being bet by ‘miners’.
Can’t remember the full story I heard, but that’s why there’s only pokies in the casino.
Great I reckon, we can enjoy a pub for what it’s all about without the distraction of pokies
Hopefully it stays that way, everywhere else the gaming lobby has both major parties in check and anyone else that decides to take an anti gambling stance can usual expect to be taken down by the gaming lobby.
Yep, I was already turned off the first time OP mentioned pokies. It’s not like we can claim to be too much better though, there’s plenty of pubs here with TABs in them.
Pokies would destroy Perth. The layback attitude and pub loving patrons would love having a punt. 
It would kill a lot of working class families.

Coming from Sydney and moving to Perth to raise our daughter has been great. We aren't Pub people, nor were we in Sydney. But working in construction has allowed me to see what Perth pubs are like.. most are still dumps, that have TAB and TV 's showing all the races. Some even have skimpies over here.. not really a fan either. I don't agree with the proliferation of pokies everywhere, but a lot of pubs in Perth are in a time warp.
Eh most pubs I see in Perth are just restaurants with a bar. Rather then a bar selling food.
Double whammy.  Satellite dishes started popping up on top of pubs around the same time.  They were all becoming sports bars before sports bars were a thing.  Gaming in general, really.  Which, yeah, I get it.  Huge draw card.  But it changed the demographic too.  I'm not sure which is more depressing - the old ducks running down the clock pumping their pensions into the slots, or the young tradies dropping hundreds on horses.   The blank stares as they await the inevitable outcome are very, very similar. I'm 64, when I was 19 and gigging regularly, the pub crowds were awesome.  Now, nah.
Who needs live music when you've got the jingle jangle of the feature going off every few minutes
I’d agree with you except the live music scene in WA (with no pokies) has also declined dramatically from what it was in the late 90s, early 00s
I stated playing gigs in pubs 30+ years ago around Melbourne. 

The vast majority of inner city pubs that I used to gig at but now don’t have live music didn’t turn into pokies venues, they turned into gastro pubs or restaurants.

Arguably the rise of DJ’s did as much to kill live local bands as pokies did.
Maybe we should.... Blow up the pokies.

I'll see myself out
Yes good old Woolworths ripping you off on the pokies and then crushing Aussie business with Dan Murphys and grocery price gouging!!!
My local (Narrabeen Sands) is a pub well known for its live music. Bought by ALH, knocked down massive land sell-off and we now have a small pub selling the absolute worst food. I have to travel two suburbs to get a decent schnitty.
Yeah the latter I call the yuppy pub. Melbournes inner north has a hell of a lot unsurprisingly and while I don’t mind a couple I hope the old character filled pubs can survive.
What’s a schnitty ? I’m just an American who follows this sub in the case my dream of visiting your country actually comes true.
That's the one. I wouldn't have minded as much if the food prices went up a bit, but we're in a lower income area, so pokies are the best way to extract money from locals.
And if it's not ALH it's Black Rhino Group
$9 schooner? I'm down to find a bargain whereabouts you talking??
It's not economical selling a schooner for $6
Like Maccas
I grew up without a pub culture, and when I came over here I just couldn't understand the appeal of pubs. It felt like a let down; I thought they were inherited from the British, but whenever I'd watch any British TV show set after 2000 the pubs looked much nicer and more inviting...
The problem you have now with UK pubs, is a lot of them are franchises (apart from ‘spoons etc), and even though they still have different names, if you look at the menus, it’s clear they are owned by the same conglomerate: for example, stonegate group. But even these pubs are far and away better than a lot of the offerings in Aus
I don't find them that different to here in that regard. Loads of city/inner city pubs turned into quasi restaurants.
butter roof piquant lush quaint smart relieved one foolish flag

 *This post was mass deleted and anonymized with [Redact](https://redact.dev)*
There’s a few pubs around with attached TABs, theyre usually pretty grotty though. I’d rather go to a restaurant somewhere that serves decent food, I can get a drink and not be left depressed when I leave.
Yea, main reason I don't like going to pubs for a casual feed. Pokies, even when hidden, are just this black hole.
It was odd coming back to Perth after living in Canberra for awhile. The pokies and clubs are such a part of life there but then non existent here. I will say that in Canberra there is more of a family element to most of the clubs - I recently went to QLD and the approach there is more like what OP has listed.
But the trains now run on time.
i can't think of a "venue" in NSW that doesn't have pokies. clubs nsw is a criminal organisation that has made the state government their bitch.
I played in a snooker comp for a year and really enjoyed the social side. Some of us would meet up early and have dinner at the club and then a few beers during the comp. I had to give it away after a year though, I simply couldn't stand the sound of the pokies going off in unison every other button press. Then we had some players who'd play their match and then go hit the pokies rather than score or ref the next one. And you guessed it, go on to complain about never having any money. The whole thing ended up depressing AF. Would have been a totally different scene minus the pokies. 

I'm also from the era of live music everywhere in the 80's and 90's and so I still have the hatred towards the pokies as a result of that too.
Where are you getting $10 beers? I presume they're schooners?
Must be a small glass of beer. Can't get a pint for under $15 now.
>  I grew up in the best live band scene in the world.

LA or New York?
Hemmesification is real.
How have politicians killed it?
>for the moment

Forever. Keeping them banned has to be an 80:20 or better issue. I don't think I've ever met anyone who actually wants pokies. 

The way pokies are deployed over east is an aberration globally. There's no reason to assume it should metastasize over here. More likely they eventually get banned over there IMO.
The saddest part is I can’t figure out what team.

Can’t be Newcastle Knights (Wests) as they never win.

My initial thought was Penrith (Rooty Hill RSL)

Could even be Geelong if it’s AFL (The Sphinx)

It could probably be any team across both codes.
Didn’t read all the way through.  Merivale or ALH?
ALH is an Endeavour subsidiary.
ALH and endeavour are the same company.
It's less of an issue in Victoria.
*insert urinal meme with wa person mentioning they dont have pokies*
I paid 25 last night (plus surcharge of course) for two pints. Yeesh.
No they don't...
I feel like eventually (probably later than sooner) gambling ads for betting apps/sites will be banned or maybe the government starts taxing online gambling. I'm surprised somehow Australia has avoided having Inheritance tax even though both the UK and US do.
There are three within 5km of us NOR in WA and all of them still have a good feel and decent crowd and a "to be expected" pub feed.  Two of the three have been renovated in the last 5 years. Have to agree, I don't miss the pokies.
Australian venue co. Is a big player. 200+ pubs in Australia, 24 in Perth
I have noticed this too. A lot of the pubs have been "renovated" and suddenly have very similar menus and styling. I'm not sure if they're all owned by the same company but they have lost their individuality. 
Really miss The Flying Scotsman, it was such a great pub. It’s now The Elford and has really lost its character.
Perth was always a bit different. It held off with weekend trading for supermarkets as well so still had corner stores long after they had all shut down over east.
Equally annoying
It's a shame our sports bars didn't end up like the US - just a place to go and watch sports while drinking, minimal gambling facilitation.
I wasn't around for the Perth live music scene of the 90's & 00's, but I gotta say it's pretty sweet now. The city is chockas with talent - they're just not the pub rock bands of decades past.
WA I'd a bit different,  as a musician it will cost me a such to travel to Perth to do shows as it would for me to go to Asia or new Zealand. So WA is way more reliant on its local scene compared to the east coast where bands tour from Brisbane to Melbourne as an "east coast tour" 
There's nothing comparable for WA
This is spot on. There's simply less demand for live music now and rock isn't popular (and the folk/singer-singwriter style isn't that popular either). But restaurants and bakeries are booming because people go out for good food.
Ironic that the dude developed a gambling habit, or so I was told.
I know everyone here lives to shit on Woolworths, but they don't own pubs anymore, they demerged Endeavour Group in 2021, and Woolies owns about 4% of that company.
Woolies sold ALH it’s a separate company now
Chicken schnitzel (crumbed chicken breast)
Parmas/Parmis are the real pub meal of choice
Hope it comes true for you mate
Sometimes a veal schnitzel.
plants panicky forgetful bewildered puzzled drab gaping important late wide

 *This post was mass deleted and anonymized with [Redact](https://redact.dev)*
Newcastle; pretty much any suburban pub you’re paying around $8-9 for a schooner of Toohey’s.
That's a good comparison. 

The three Macca's in town used to be owned and operated by a family business

It meant that high standards were upheld, they were consistent and you knew you could get a decent meal.  

We now have five in town and they are owned by a Sydney based hospitality business. They're all over the place and pretty unreliable. 

They also have no community involvement and no longer sponsor anything locally.
Yes they did seem a bit like that, even during our short stay. We visited at least one that seemed a bit more independent but hard to say.
TABs have done a great job making their decor match the vibe of gambling addiction - grey, drab, depressing, with the bare minimum of furniture required to sit down and waste your life. Pretty much on par with Centrelink offices for their ability to remind you that if you’re there, you’re at the bottom of the barrel with your life.
The Pinsent in Wangaratta, Victoria keeps all of them seperated, the Tab, bottle shop, pokies and dining.

Their pokies are behind soundproof, frosted glass.
Qld suburban pubs are usually family restaurants with outdoor play areas.
I think in my 12 years of living in Perth I’ve seen a train be late once. And that was because someone had jumped in front of it before it got to our station. I find they’re actually pretty reliable.
There's a handful that have ripped them out, they'll usually announce it as a selling point. But it's maybe a dozen here and there around Sydney and mainly in the Inner West.
The friendly jordies stuff on Troy Solz really opened my eyes to how bad they are

https://www.friendlyjordies.com/post/troy-stolz

Check out his youtube videos if you haven't seen them
thought teeny money imminent fear cooperative doll vase different tub

 *This post was mass deleted and anonymized with [Redact](https://redact.dev)*
I know of Crowbar that doesn't have any (At least when I went up to Sydney a couple years ago for some gigs)
East Sydney hotel woolloomooloo
Surely clubs nsw is against pokies in pubs?
Or London surely.
Melbourne, Google it
Firstly the liberals under Kennett, allowed gambling in the state, they opened the cadino and allowed pokies in pubs.

The public didn't ask for it.

They imtroduced new taxes on alcohol alcohol over and over and over again until it was only the upper class that could go out for drinks between their incessant holidays to europe.

Both sides of politics did this, the public, by and large, didn't ask for it.
I do hope that you are right. The excuse for bringing them into pubs over East started with "support for sporting clubs and community groups"

It was a scam of course. And thry do far more harm to the community than they do good, however, the "for the moment" was really a reminder that a moment of taking our eyes off the ball and we could have them here very quickly.
Nobody in the other states wanted pokies either.
It's probably Penrith Leagues Club. A huge as place with a LOT of pokies
Is it? I’m in VIC and felt like the OP was talking about the pub local to my cousin along Nepean highway. Everything OP describes 100% matches what OP described.
I would say it’s more of an issue in Victoria. In Victoria pokies in pubs are front and centre and there’s no getting away from them, while in NSW they are located in seperate areas (known as VIP Lounges) where if you are not actively looking for them they are out of sight and out of mind.

I go for a knockoff at my local and my partner goes and feeds the one-armed bandit. Unless we find ourselves in the smokers area at the same time we don’t even run into each other and very few of the punters or staff are aware we’re even together. Couldn’t happen in a Melbourne pub.
That’s the joke!
I'm almost certain there are changes coming to gambling advertising. They're rolling out over like a 3 or 4 year period gradually, though.
Australian Venue Co has inked a deal to manage Coles' Spirit Hotels group. AVC currently owns about 60 pubs, clubs, bars and restaurants around Australia and will add Coles' 87 Spirit Hotels venues in Queensland, including around 3000 poker machines, to its portfolio.

Between ALH and AVC you have both supermarket chains heavily invested in pushing pokies and our government laps up the tax
Eat Drink Play here in South Australia, all souless
ALH / Endevour Group and Australian Venue Co own a huge portion of the market
Yep, we used to alternate between the Queens and the Scotto, me Mum and Dad were fans also .. been there once since the new crew renovated and rebranded it .. not a fan, same mob that own the Revelry and the Camfield, I believe..
Yep, they sure broke something that was not broke, used to go there with my oldies when 6Ix
I'm American, except for a few places there's no gambling outside of casinos and sports bars often have pretty decent food and good beers. I would hate having slot machines in a bar. In Massachusetts we have a game called Keno that's in a lot of bars but it's pretty unobtrusive and you mostly won't even notice people "playing"  it.
Plenty of Melbourne pubs play footy and don't have pokies though?
Eh you're both kinda right. There are absolutely a ton of talented original bands in Perth at the moment. The venue situation seemed to be getting a little better until a few years ago too, I think COVID really didn't help that. However I was around and active in the music scene in the 90s and 00s and it was an incredibly strong scene with a bunch of great venues. I was into metal at the time and Perth may have actually had the best metal scene in the country at that time. Karnivool, Full Scale Deflection, The Dirty Whitler and Rhino Ted to name just a few.

Edit: Heavy Weight Champ (how could I forget)

Perth punches way above its weight for musical talent and generally everyone is quite supportive of each other.
One of the bands members of the Whitlams had a really bad gambling habit, a number of their songs are about it including that one. I believe he ended up committing suicide. Very sad story.
Well he didn't sing blow up the TAB now did he.
He didn’t, but one of his band mates did, who then took his own life because of it. The song still rings true 25 years later
I think 9% but their history backs up my comments.
People need to remember that big companies don't give a damn about Australian brands or family companies it's all about the mighty dollar.
They still own 9% I think. My partner works for ALH and gets woolies benefits. They're still in, in a small capacity.
Part of the Endeavour Group now I believe.
Ah cool! Sounds delish with a beer. Thanks!
There are other meats too if you're in Adelaide..
Beef / pork schnit is top teir
Damn, putting my chicken fingers to shame over here. What kinda bread do you use for the Parms? Or is it not a sandwich? lol. Im currently looking at airfare right now.
Love a good chick parm.
Chicken *Parmi**~~giana~~*
Me too, times be tough over here and I know it’s tough for y’all too. Chicken Parm is a regular pub food for y’all. I’ve been wondering what the hell a Schmitty is for 4 months and I finally remembered to ask. Lmao after finding out it’s something I make regularly. Thanks for the info y’all are a friendly bunch, as soon as my husband finishes treatment we’re comin over to visit!
That was my experience in Geelong growing up when we went out for tea for birthdays celebrations etc the usual 
Bistro function room pokies bottle shop  beer gardens all kept separate.
So are most of the clubs in Canberra, with a separate area for the gambling machines.
The NSW government excuse for allowing pokies in pubs was that the tax revenue would be used to improve the trains. You just gotta forget all the people whose lives are ruined by pokies.
as an ignorant sydneysider i have no idea what you mean
Oh you naive person
In what universe is Melbourne better than New York, LA, or London for live music?
Funny how there isn't a tax on pokies...ala your $1 bet from years ago for one line (I know nothing of pokies apart from basic programming of them) would be around 1.50 now if they kept it in line with alcohol increases...infact I'm suprised there isn't...after all every other adult decision is taxed too much...
I mean if you think only the upper class can go out for drinks then you need a reality check
Kirner opened up pokies in the state, FYI
Ding ding ding We have a Weiner!!!
Really? Must be the case down the peninsula. In Melbourne and other cities I don't feel it's the case.
Lol, let me guess, the Longbeach Hotel in Chelsea? It's what I thought of as well
I’ve got around 6 pubs near me with awesome food and live music but that’s pretty close to Melbourne cbd 

Probably just a suburb issue
As someone who spent 26 years in Sydney and 18 years in Melbourne... It's a bigger issue in Sydney. Those VIP lounges are everywhere (and depressing af). My locals don't even have pokies.
The Queens is still a great spot for a drink  and people watching. Although we no longer visit The Elford, Molly’s Irish Pub (the old Beaufort Local) is much better now they did a great job on the refit and the menu looks pretty good too.
We have Keno here as well, but it's generally unused, now that gambling in other forms is fucking *everywhere*
Usa is 5 years behind Australia in terms of sport gambling. I love that the only advertising on nfl jerseys are the 2 tiny nike logos on the arms. Compare that to nrl and afl jerseys
Definitely not the majority.

Also, Melbourne is like, 200 kilometers edge to edge, so you need a bit of luck to be in the right place.
You are partially correct in that song was written about said friend, but this article might enlighten you as to what happened after said song. 

https://www.theguardian.com/music/2022/jan/28/the-whitlams-tim-freedman-on-loss-light-and-horseracing-i-was-a-full-time-gambler-for-four-years
Not for long. A lot of HR related stuff is finally being split away. Benefits will be part of this. Hence BWS having a new app all of a sudden.
And drowned in gravy.
The confusion is that it's actually called a schnito.


/s
A beautifully thin and crispy beef schnitty is far superior to the chicken variety. I’m always disappointed when chicken is the only option on the menu
It's a Chicken parmesan in America. Funnily enough, [Wikipedia ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicken_parmesan)says it was invented in America by Italian immigrants, based on the eggplant parmigiana, and then heavily adopted by UK and Australia later on! (ready for the downvotes for this fact lol)

They also serve it on fries here instead of spaghetti, and a slice of ham between the cheese and chicken, which I agree with.

More history on how it came to Australia here: [https://www.broadsheet.com.au/national/food-and-drink/article/brief-history-chicken-parmigiana](https://www.broadsheet.com.au/national/food-and-drink/article/brief-history-chicken-parmigiana)
Imagine the Schnitty, described above, then imagine someone used it as a pizza base.

That’s a parmi.

Classic Australian pub food, with hot chips. Though the first time this Brit had one was when I was living in London and my American housemate (from New York) cooked us all “Chicken Parmigiana” one night so I reckon you have them in the US too.

But they are everywhere here in Aus.
Not a sandwich - it’s a crumbed chicken breast with tomato paste ham and melted cheese on top. It’s also called a parma, don’t let anyone tell you it’s called a parmi
It's not a sandwich. They're kinda like a schnitty but generally you use a whole unflattened breast, crumb and season it, then add a tomato sauce and cheese on top. There are tonnes of other toppings you can add but that's the general recipe
A parma is a chicken breast, crumbed then cooked with a type of napoli sauce, ham (or other meat depending on the type of parma) and cheese
I was trying to be inclusive to all the freaks that use parmi and you still had to comment. Next time I'm sticking to parma and turning off my notifications 
You will love it here, for sure.
Yes they sound closer to the typical Qld experience than OP's.
Or was it that the police minister at the time was also a hotelier.
An each way bet for a train wreck.
Pubs are not clubs, and so are the competition.

Any way they can make pubs worse makes thier depressing pokie dens more profitable. Board of director bonuses all round!
Thats a really good point.
How many people can afford to go out more than a couple times a month with their mates? This leads to the death of third places.
Frequency and volition are the variables you're ignoring to shore up your dogma placator
That's mostly because there's so much more money in the broadcast advertising in NFL/other NA sports. The massive difference in the number of stoppages in games means that there's way more advertisements run during the broadcast, so they don't need the money from adverts on players.
I think you meant lemon juice.
I moved to the eastern states for a bit and it's nothing but chicken... What a sad state of affairs there.
Wtf you get beef schlnitties??? Is that like chicken fried steak? (An American dish)
Ayy I wrote that
[deleted]
1970s gor-met, makes good pub food
You can - you don't have to drink
Excuse me?
He abso-fucking-lutely did not.
User name checks out.

For real a bit of lemon on a scnitty is a beautiful thing. Not sure why you're being down voted, you have my undying support and admiration for speaking the truth!
*Sad ADL noises*
I had to google chicken fried steak lol. Not quite. If you Google beef schnitzel you’ll get the gist. 

It’s steak, preferably hammered out a little bit although this isn’t always the case, dredged in flour, then beaten egg, then seasoned breadcrumbs and then deep fried. 

In South Oz, you can usually order these with gravy, mushroom sauce, pepper sauce, Diane sauce or parmigiana (topped with a tomato - think pizza - sauce, grated cheese and then heated until the cheese is melted. 

Some places will do more elaborate toppings. BBQ sauce, bacon and cheese; ham, pineapple and cheese; jalapeño, corn chips, salsa and cheese; smashed avo and cheese etc. 

In Queensland you can sometimes find a crumbed steak which is kinda similar, but that doesn’t usually come with as many different topping options.
haha that's awesome, good article mate!
I wrote fries so the American wouldn’t be confused.
- I mean if you think only the upper class can go out for drinks then you need a reality check

- you don’t have to drink

Pick an argument
Mate, even going out for a meal is expensive now. If you want to do hobby stuff, also expensive.
Weird to see this comment downvoted.
I love lemon on a snitzel. Gravy for the chips!
Ha! Yeah I have a serious addiction to lemon. I love it on a snitzel. Gravy for the chips!
I've been cheating lately. I buy beef sizzle steak, flour it, egg it, roll in breadcrumbs with salt/pepper/mixed herbs and paprika and shallow fry each side for a couple of mins each. Bewdaful - Con The Fruiterer
That's because wages in austealia are so high
It's clearly not just that - if it were just wages driving prices up then we wouldn't have seen things go up by as much as we have, even accounting for inflation.
Award wages have kept up with inflation over the last few years....
