Jamestown Area, South Australia
I really don’t get the hatred some people have or claim to have.  They look pretty cool to me, and are positively cheery compared to a coal mine or a fossil fuel power station endlessly emitting poisons and damaging the climate.
Now do one with a open coal mine and the sunset
Kinda weird how these mechanical marvels (that big carbon hates) are an eyesore but the pylons and wires that connect them get a shrug.  You gotta think that winding up these rubes was some of the best dirty money spend in recent political history.
I think they look neat
What wilderness? that is broadacre monoculture farming. Towers fit right in.
OMG, look! They've killed all the wheat! It's brown and dry! /s
I think wind turbines are beautiful. 


If you want to see ugly go visit a coal or uranium mine.
Dad, he reckons wind turbines are a reminder of man's ability to generate electricity.
I look out at dozens of windmills from my front door, and I think they’re gorgeous.
Never mind the equally giant electricity towers. They're fine...
Steer clear of r/wollongong with that viewpoint lol
oof ouch owie my eyeballs
You've looking at an agricultural wasteland and complaining about wind turbines, get real champ
Eyesores?

Drive up the New England and tell me which is uglier; the wind farms, or Liddell and Bayswater?
I was just wondering what Joe Hockey was doing with himself these days
Nope
Surely the greenies know about the flight paths for birds.  It’s well documented
Yeah I’m pretty sure this “OMG they’re an eyesore!” meme is just politically motivated bullcrap.

I love them. I think they look epic and futuristic and clean. Now compare them to the unrivalled beauty of the chimneys of a coal-fired power station…
It’s proven that migrating birds are killed or inhumanly damaged as a lot are built on the birds flight paths.
Until they’re covering every square km of land
[https://www.aussietowns.com.au/wp-content/gallery/queenstown-tas/queenstown01a.jpg](https://www.aussietowns.com.au/wp-content/gallery/queenstown-tas/queenstown01a.jpg)
[deleted]
The windmills are coming, just not as many as planned.
I look forward to them
You have to laugh at all the greenies downvoting any comment that doesn't profess a deep love for their precious wind turbines.
It's also well documented that bird kills are really not a big deal, and these claims been over-blown by "confected concerns" of wind farm opponents. Both house windows and domestic cats are significantly bigger bird killers, and we don't seem to be doing much about those. 

But it's true that birds are at very slight risk, unlike the purported risk to whales from offshore turbines, which is utterly false and deliberate misinformation. 

There are well-established and proven mitigation methods that reduce the risk posed to birds by turbines to near zero. The most obvious one is to avoid siting wind turbines in established bird migration routes (this is already mandatory) and using patterns or colours to help birds see and avoid the blades.

Ditching 2ind turbines to save the birds would be a serious case of throwing the baby out with the bathwater. They're not perfect, but they're a damn sight better than most of the alternatives.
As if birds are killed by toxic fumes from industrial facilities at a far higher rate
Don't forget the sheer majesty of the open-cut coal mines, and the way the coal dust in the Hunter protects the vines from the hot summer sun.
[Windows in urban areas kill birds at a higher rate](https://climate.mit.edu/ask-mit/do-wind-turbines-kill-birds), and the industry already has a best practices code to minimise disruption to birds. There is a lengthy environmental approvals process that must be adhered to, and I note with interest that it is the side of politics most often screeching about green or red tape slowing down projects who also screech about wind turbines. The 'birds' argument may be repeated in good faith, but it is not made initially in good faith.
Did you care about birds before this, or is this just a convenient negative for something you hate
Currently over 50% of Australia's land mass [is used for agriculture.](https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/products/insights/snapshot-of-australian-agriculture) This involved the destruction of native habitats on an unimaginable scale. The land required to power Australia from wind and solar would be [less than 0.2% of Australia's land mass.](https://theconversation.com/no-threat-to-farm-land-just-1-200-square-kilometres-can-fulfil-australias-solar-and-wind-energy-needs-223183)
Beautiful. Must be a "clean coal" mine /s
Correct but not "wilderness" as claimed by OP
Nature^^TM sure is beautiful.
Fascinating.
none of those ugly scary 'greens' just they way it should be /s
