
Newsflash: standard operating procedure since forever.   Anytime relative prices, trade embargoes, biosecurity issues allow it, it's on.
Just tariff it, unless it's specialist (premium) product from a particular country.  The long term consequences of food insecurity are a disaster not worth temporarily cheaper prices, it's one of the few things Australia still has going for it, we mostly eat food produced here.
We need subsidies to insure staples are manufactured in Australia. We learnt absolutely nothing from Covid. We can spend 100s of billions on nuke submarines but can’t have some Aussie peaches in a tin
My advice, don't touch anything originating in China.
Decent origin food labelling laws would help with that but our governments exist purely for the benefit of big business and their shareholders.
Not for the benefit of Australian citizens and consumers 
I won't buy foods from India or China, their food hygiene standards are notorious.

SEA, Australia and Europe are fine.
You have two options -  buying more imported food can lead to higher prices, while supporting local food production helps keep prices stable and ensures food security. Your pick!
Tried to buy some pickles for some burgers. After last weeks disgusting post, I checked the Country of Origin. Every single brand including the generics was Made in India. I wasn't even looking for Australian made, East Europe or SEA would do, but I'm not buying Indian.

I made other plans for my meal.
Imports that are rising in cost because of import inflation?
[removed]
Or we stop claiming supermarkets are price gouging when they are forced to increase prices. 

Then they might be more inclined to stock local
Tariffs just make food more expensive for us.  

The only justification for tariffs would be to offset those countries' government subsidies in the production and transport of that food.   But since every country does that it doesn't really help.
Even a manufacture simple can of sardines cant be manufactured in Australia!   The most basic low tech manufacturing  that has all the advantages of hitech  automated canning processes we  dont even want to do this.

Its pathetic really when you look at the demand for clean and safe food. We could easily dominate the market with clean and safe food products if we bothered to try. All that the politicians are interested in is selling Australia shorts for 10 cents in tax avoidance profits.

 Our politicians don't have any commitment towards a self sufficient Australia that can also be a premium brand on the world stage. Just like they destroyed the made in  UK branding, they have done the same with the many good brands we have in Australia by allowing excessive concentration. Governments  just   facilitate in the easy free movement of capital for profit rather than having any real industry policies.

And now look globally how good product brand names are the most sort after and desired merchandise in the world because of authenticity and quality. We could have had hundreds of world brands if we tried. The success of milk powder, vitamins, ginger beer and things like timtams were the all the clues we needed but as usual the opportunity sails away from our shores because of incompetence and lack of taxation policies, its all bricks and mortar and tax avoidance as our main industry policies, sad really!
Easier said than done thanks to the "packed in new Zealand" loophole
Look how the poison oil  from China has essentially been swept under the carpet.  How much of the oil  was circulated and under which company brands?. Government working by aiding and abetting the companies who sold this poison. They more interested in protecting profits and companies than protecting peoples health from buying poison products. Its a disgrace really. But this is standard practice from Australian governments, the care factor about citizens and consumer rights is zero while  they buy the spin from corporations and everyone else who cares is an extremist that should be jail. The corporate plutocracy government at its best.
I make my own for burgers, just slice a cucumber up and leave it in vinegar, peppercorns, dill, salt, a bit of sugar. They’re ready a few hours later.
McClures is made in USA, I think fletchers is Victorian 
Your [comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/1eir9td/australias_food_manufacturing_industry_worries/lgdftaf/) in /r/australia was automatically removed because you used a URL shortener or content cache.

These are not permitted in /r/australia as they impair our ability to enforce link blacklists.

Please re-post your comment using direct, full-length URL's only.


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
They are a public traded company. Their incentive is to maximise share holder value, nothing else. That means maximising profits however which they can. There’s no competition so no need to compete against over retailers on price as there competition charges same retail price. 

Recent articles about buying Australian produced meat overseas being significantly cheaper than buying the same meat locally is a perfect example. The overseas retailers have the added overhead of international shipping and import duties and can still sell less at less than in Australia and still turn a profit.
(Kiwi here)You really have to keep an eye of the frozen fruit from NZ. The cunts try their hardest to pretend it's not Chinese.
There was a post on this sub a few weeks or so ago with the "Australian" juice or canned fruit where the only ingredient from Australia was the water
> Easier said than done thanks to the "packed in new Zealand" loophole

I don't buy anything from New Zealand. If they want to be a backdoor for China, then New Zealand will get classed as Chinese as far as I am concerned.
And have 1/3rd the min wage we do.

Our massive wages are the cause for local prices.
I work for a foreign owned company. They send shit to us to repack. Country of origin is pointless if you add enough steps in the chain.
That's how companies like Kmart, Target and BigW get around the slavery supply chain laws. Send it around so much it's nearly impossible to know.
