
This is up there with the guy who lives around me who drives a Nissan Urvan. In texta he has written Keith above the Urvan. It's the Keith Urvan.
Funny how big she is here - when I saw her as a judge on that show I was like who tf is that, never heard of her…spent the 90s/00s in Japan, US, Canada - still couldn’t tell you one of her songs but she is annoying AF on x-factor or whatever it is
Definitely some very b grade judges on those shows
🎵And I was born to drive🎵
Bigger air conditioner
I like her song about "it dont impress me much"
*Huge Van
Not as good as IVECO with "MASS" and "CK" either side of it.
Attention to Font would be nice
Haven't seen that name in a while.
🤣🤣🤣always thought she was truck like..
She’s a Rig
Who doesn’t love a good rim
Corny as hell but I love a good pun.
She had a small period in the mid-2000s where she was massive in Australia (the album Innocent Eyes) and then I don't think she's ever had the same relevance since, but the legacy from that period is enough to get talent show judge gigs I suppose.
I wonder how people can think they have any merit as judges  at all. They have no training in any field related to music, arts or entertainment. Its subjective has been opinions that would be no better then you or me being judges. Talent can be easily be spotted  you dont need to be a personality wanker to tell you what is good or bad.  

I bet if someone like Tones and I went on any of these shows before she was famous she would be kicked off because she would not conform to the judges stereotypical thinking of what talent and the music industry is about.
Good job if you can get one.
Doesn’t take much to be on reality tv in aus. Seeing that most of our talented stars go straight to the US to work, we’re only left with slim pickings
They get bland judges, who look for bland performances. Then they make the show all about the judges which is even worse. I kind of miss Dicko who was an actual record company guy, Mark Holden who was an actual producer, and Marsha who at least was a legend.
Well, the audience is ten times bigger. If your rich it’s a great place to live, as opposed to poor and needing medical care, then it’s a nightmare. Com si com sa…
