Shrinkflation now turning into a means to charge more for the sizes we had in the past.

Sad times ahead…
Six bucks for Pringles? Tell 'em they're dreamin'!
170g! Up from 134g.

They used to be 200g. This isn't nostalgia.

You can get 480g of the home brand for $6.60.
It might be because I haven’t had them in ages, but I tried Pringles recently and they were shithouse.
I’m eating a lot healthier these days thanks to inflation. 🤙
What in the actual fuck is that pricing?. Colesworths has no shame.
Nudie Juice is now $9.50 for a 2L bottle. It was $8.50 last week. It was $6.00 only a couple of years ago.

Ridiculous.
Th supermarkets and manufacturers deal in so much bullshit now - it's un-Australian.
Extra Big Ass Pringles, now with more MOLECULES.
Holy crap on a cracker.....

That would be expensive as well...crap more than the cracker
Pringles have always tasted like cardboard. This just provides another reason to not buy them.
More tube than fucking Pringle's nowadays.
$6 for less than one potato of chips
Pringles lost my money after they changed their recipe to taste like dog shit everywhere but the US.
It's only pringles, not that sad
Honestly I’ve just started buying the store brand. They’re half the price but really not that much worse
170g lel
Pringle's used to be amazing in the 90's now they are a bland, cheap waste of money. There are far better alternatives.

I remember the sour cream coating on both sides, and it was so thick.
Curious about the diameter - I stopped buying Pringles when my hand no longer fit in the can
should be called "now tastes like shit due to cheap outsourced labour and substandard ingredients" stack
And the homebrand tastes pretty good
Normal size in germany is 160g (was 200). 
The price is insane though. Bought one for 1,3€ couple days ago.
> I tried Pringles recently and they were shithouse.

They changed the shape, the recipe and now the size. Fuck Pringles. Even original taste shithouse.
Made in Malaysia now.
Orange juice price to farmers got so low a couple of years ago that farmers were ripping up citrus trees. Now juice companies are battling to get sufficient supply without imports
> it's un-Australian.

Thanks for the laugh, what does the price of Pringles have to do with Australian identity?
They used to be made in the USA and tasted so much better and were in larger sized tubes. You kinda get used to them but they are still a downgrade.
I am in Malaysia not one Pringle can be seen LOLZ 🤣
Thanks for the context! Nudie is the only OJ my wife will drink, hates every other one we've tried for some reason.
It’s the vibe of it. It’s the Constitution. It’s Mabo. It’s justice. It’s law. It’s the vibe and ah, no that’s it. It’s the vibe. I rest my case.
Of course, it's over the top and  a laugh! But it's the bullshit marketing that gets my goat - all the artifice that goes into trying to convince the consumer that lower quantities at higher prices is somehow a good thing.
Aldi pringles (think they're called stax) are like the old ones
I get Original Juice occasionally and their prices have gone up too
Pretty solid argument really
You had me at Vibe. I get you now!
