With all this talk about how well Aussies are doing at the Olympics, just want to give a shout out to Oscar Piastri, Daniel Ricardo and Jack Doohan.

In 2025 we will have 3 Aussies in Formula 1. A sport were only 20 people are allowed to compete.

That means we make up 15% of the Formula 1 grid whilst only making up 0.3% of the population of the world.

There is a chance we may even have Liam Lawson in a car next year too. (He's a kiwi but we always claim the good ones as our own) 
Doohan adding flavour commentary from his apartment balcony at Monaco was brilliant. I’m stoked for him to get a shot. Seems like a lovely kid.

Definitely keeping fingers crossed for Lawson too and will absolutely claim him. 20% of the grid is not too shabby for Aus/NZ.
4 including Bottas. 5 if Lawson gets a seat and does well. If he DeVries it then he’s a kiwi.
I like the DR optimism
I mean, I’d love the shit out of this but 2 out of the 3 are not confirmed…
Two haven't confirmed. Let's not get too excited
I've only really been following F1 for a bit over a year and when I started there was only 1 Aussie on the grid, now there are three.  You're all very welcome.
Wishful thinking.
Doohey got signed? Let's fucking gooooooooo
Can daniel secure his seat?
I don't follow much racing, isn't Doohan from a pedigree racing family or something? Wasn't his dad quite accomplished? I vaguely remember the name
So awesome! 

Hope Dan keeps his seat and has battles with Oscar next year
Has Doohan been confirmed??? I haven't seen any news about this.
Jack is not officially announced *yet*. There's just a general assumption that he will and a lot of quiet talk that it is more or less done.

Likewise, Daniel may yet be in a different team next year.

Otherwise though, yes, I am all vibes about this, three drivers! <3 If Red Bull get their shit together, we may yet get a double Aussie podium this year, too.
Also among some of the best sportsmanship in F1 too. Oscar is the youngest driver on the grid right now, but somehow perhaps the most mature
Piastri is really pushing his more experienced team mate, Norris, this year. You're only the lead driver while you're the fastest driver.


Unfortunately Ricciardo seems to have lost a lot of his edge over the last couple of years. One of the RB teams will have to give Lawson a shot and his position does not look secure.
There are 3 Aussies in 2024...
Oscar!
Jack got it! Congrats! I thought alpine might be gearing up for an announcement on him as he did a puff piece with sky sports that aired during Spa about being a reserve driver and how he wanted a seat in F1. Shame it’s with alpine given their current issues but gotta start somewhere! I’m sure his dad will be proud.
Shocking how well we punch above our weight on the world stage 
Imagine if Jack impacts F1 the same way his dad impacted MotoGP. 

That would be awesome.
3 Aussie drivers, but only two of them are good. Ricciardo has been washed for some time now with his only contribution being cringy jokes about his balls.
It is unlikely Daniel will be driving next year, but who knows. 

Also unfortunately we have to share Piastri with about 5 other countries, and the list just seems to keep growing.
Guessing Liam Lawson gets DR's seat before the end of this year.
I don’t get how danny ric is still there. I guess cause his personality is amusing but he lost his skill years ago lol
Daniel Ricciardo to Red Bull, Oscar Piastri with McLaren and Jack Doohan debuting with Alpine. Since we’re claiming Valterri Bottas, his likely to remain with Sauber!
Dirvers?
https://imgur.com/gallery/kzDIC2Y
I was inhaling all the hopium I could that Bottas would get a seat as well as Jack and Liam and we’d have 25% of the grid! I’ve not completely given up but I might have to settle for 15-20% which ain’t too shabby!
I missed that commentary. Is there a video?
Especially considering how they drive on the wrong side of the road there!

Haha whoops. I’m a Canadian who’s had a couple beers and thought this was the F1 Reddit. Ima stand by what I said though. Shifting with your left is weird.
I feel like only 2 of those 3 will happen  - Lawson will only be in at either Ricciardo or Bottas' expense
DR is the perfect example of why being liked by your co-workers is just as important as being good at your job. If you suck at your job, people might still keep you just cause you're fun to be around.
If RB is moving off anyone, it has to be Checo. DR has done enough to get at least one more year, hopefully in the big boy seat with Lawson hopefully in VCARB.
I mean a spokesperson from redbull has said that there will be no change in the line-up with yuki and Daniel next year so I'd say the optimism is fairly warranted.
these are my streets
Hopium
Oscar and Jack are confirmed. The only way Ricardo would lose his VCARB seat is to go into a Red bull seat
Ive only just started getting into f1 and I haven't seen max win once. I apologize to red bull fans.
Alpine haven't confirmed it yet, but they haven't had a 100% track record of knowing who their drivers are so who knows.
Good question. Has this been confirmed by Doohan or the team??
Hopefully. As long as my boy Oscar is there I'm happy
There's been some whispers that RB could change VCARB to a junior team rather than a second team. If they change to a junior team that doesn't bode well for Daniel, but we'll see
The only reason he hasn't gotten that Red Bull seat yet is because of Mexican sponsorship.
His old man is Mick Doohan, 5x world 500cc Motorbike champion
Same reason Checo is- big name sponsorship money talks.
I love that we’ve just adopted Bottas. He seems like such a nice person.
I honestly don’t remember if it was a moment in the sky feed where he called in or just from his social media during the race.
Never underestimate the CHA stat
Yeh but checo brings in the big bucks. Especially with the likes of Disney.
lol what? Yuki deserves the seat over Danny. He is beyond it. He should go and do something in America like he wants to.
Pretty sure the "no change" is referring to the summer break, not 2025. 

I have a feeling DR will either be in the main team next year or out of F1 completely.
Jack is not confirmed (but very likely will be soon)
I think the more likely scenario would be that he will lose his seat and VCARB give Liam Lawson a chance.
Have you actually been watching F1? DR is outclassed almost every session by Yuki, apart from a few. Don't get me wrong, I love Danny, but his time is well and truly over.
Can't forget the Oscar incident.
Not confirmed by either, but multiple outlets are reporting it as a done deal.
Doohan should put out a tweet reverse Oscar style
Yeah but I’d say it’s more likely that if Checo doesn’t pick up his form by the end of the season dr will replace him at rb and Lawson would get the vcarb seat. It is still entirely possible they put Lawson straight into rb tho and go for someone like Iwasa making vcarb a junior team
And Jack's main rival for the seat has been Mick Schumacher, who is named after Mick Doohan, and whose rather famous father Michael gave Jack his first go-kart.

Frankly get rid of Gasly and give us this outstanding second-gen childhood friends team. It would be so much cooler.
That's the one, cheers
Back in his Merc days I thought he had fuck all personality but now we know he’s a loose unit and a top bloke, I think we’d have adopted him whether he was with an Aussie chick or not. You can’t help but love the guy.
He’s also the guy who rolls nat 1s regularly but the dm kinda lets him off lightly coz it happens wayyyy too often
The fact RB would rather lose the constructors championship than move on Checo is hilarious to me
DR brings in more bucks than the junior drivers that would take his spot.
Yeah that American and Mexican market he brings in is no joke
Yuki has reached his skill ceiling, he will never be a top driver.
Yuki is basically a pay driver for Honda lol

I'm firmly in the camp that believes the only reason Danny doesn't have that seat yet is because of sponsor politics. Checo might have Carlos Slim backing him, but at some point the situation is untenable. Better drivers have been fired for less.
U right, I misread the statements. 

Although if red bull really are going through with having checo next year I wouldn't be surprised if they want to keep daniel around so they can throw somebody into the seat halfway through the season if need be. That way they don't sacrifice a young driver to the 2nd red bull seat to early and lose them permanently like they have with Alex and Gasly.
Yeah the 2nd part of the statement was 2025 everything gets rearranged 
Really is down to how DR and Checo go after the summer break. If it continues as it has over the past several races then I think DR gets the nod for the RB seat and Lawson goes to the junior side.
Have you actually been watching F1? DR has been the pick of the two VCARBs since China.
Happy two year anniversary of that exact incident!

Jack has the opportunity to do the *funniest* thing ever.
No chance.
Isn’t it only one outlet and not a normal in the know reporter?
While they could that's about 60m of sponsorship money out to door when your two most profitable drivers are gone.
Is he really named after Mick Doohan? That's incredible
> now we know he’s a loose unit and a top bloke

Hopefully he doesn't dog the boys
Check brings in more money than all of the other RB drivers combined.
Yep, and Yuki’s F1 future is directly tied to Honda’s continued involvement in the sport. They’re flakey AF on that front.
And he out qualies and beats DR nearly every race. Will be shocked if he has a seat next year

I don’t think either of them are close to being WC contenders
Surely more than that I’d have said check was 50 alone especially with the amount of red bull he sells in Central America.
Yes. The Schumachers and the Doohans were neighbours for years and the two families are close, Mick still goes and stays with the Doohans during the offseason quite frequently.
I agree that Dan has no chance at a WC, he does have the capacity to help RB win the constructors though and maybe pinch the occasional win from Max. He knows how to win races.
>nearly every race

4 out of the last 6 Daniel has finished ahead
22 - 12 points but sure.
Yuki would melt down competing with max. They want someone to play #2. Lawson has his name on that seat but just needs a season or two at vcarb. That’s why Danny is still there
So you value skill over time rather than recent performances? If that’s the case then they should definitely give the seat to the driver that’s already beaten Max in the same machinery.
