
>…  “every fairytale needs a villain” 

Her lawyer thinks it’s a “fairytale”, happy ever after. He’s creating additional stress for Ms Higgins by trivialising.
Sick of hearing about Higgins, Bruce, Reynolds and this case.
So on the Hurt Scale where does Rape sit as compared to Reynolds "hurt feelings" and how will this limit Reynolds damages?

How is this pursuit of Higgins damaging to Reynold reputation (is she self harming in pursuit of money)?
> Her lawyer thinks...

Lawyers are paid to represent their clients' interests and ultimately to achieve their clients' wishes. 

This is a strategy that they will have discussed with their client, and they'll be acting this way because they believe that it's in their clients' best interests to frame it like this.

> He’s creating additional stress for Ms Higgins by trivialising.

Legal proceedings are stressful.
Not just her lawyer. Like. How stone cold do you need to be to not just try and cover this shit up, but then punish her for refusing to stay silent. The liberal party are sending a message.
> “fairytale”

Speaking of fairytales - did anybody else think it odd that Linda Reynold's husband, Robert Reid, felt that it was OK to just sit in on a rape trial - that his wife was going to be a witness at? 

The reason that was given in this defamation action is that he went along because   

*there were “divisions” among his children by his first marriage over whether they believed Ms Higgins or Senator Reynolds.*

*He especially wanted his son to hear evidence given by the cleaner who attended Senator Reynolds’ office in the hours after the rape and found it spotless, with no evidence of vomit in the bathroom as Ms Higgins had claimed.*

To my mind - for that to be a thing - there would have had to be extensive previous discussion of the situation, in the family - and foreknowledge of what the evidence was going to be.

Not what I would consider a jolly family outing - sitting through a rape trial to try and settle a family argument

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-02/linda-reynolds-brittany-higgins-david-sharaz-defamation-trial/104170630
Don’t click on it then.
> Legal proceedings are stressful.

So is rape.

Edited: Added: and Higgins didn't consent to this case.  This case is effectively non-consensual ... legal abuse.  Reynolds is prosecuting this case because she is a thin-skinned snowflake.  Reynolds herself made derogatory statements about Higgins and her partner and made actions that were detrimental to Higgins.  I expect this will come out during the prosecution of this case.
That the point of the case - Reynolds didn’t try to cover it up. The judge in the original case even said there was no evidence of a cover up.
They really do come across as existing in a bubble.
It’s not very convincing, is it?
It's statements made about a specific person *who is not the rapist* that's at issue here.

It's possible for someone to go through an awful event that was mishandled by her employer *and* make defamatory statements.
And she will take every penny of Brittany's to prove it.  And it will have no impact at all on how women in the liberal party will treat being raped in the future. It's all on the up and up.
Stop fucking proving why this case has a valid reason to be held. For fuck's sake.
Does Reynolds think that winning in court to prove she is incompetent, not malicious will make me change my mind about how she treats women who have been raped? Do you think that it will change anyone perspective for her to stand over Brittany at the end of this, having taken her compensation, so she can stand over her and say 'see!!! See!? The courts proved I didn't mistreat you after being raped! How dare you have a problem qith how I treat women! See! If you dare suggest otherwise I will take away everything you have to prove how supportive I am!!!'


You know what? You convinced me. Her going after Brittany proves how much she cares about her being raped in her office.
> Does Reynolds think that winning in court to prove she is incompetent, not malicious will make me change my mind about how she treats women who have been raped

That people have gained this opinion is exactly the point.
I already agreed with you, this is the perfect way for her to show exactly how much she really cares about  rape victims.
