This feels like almost a stupid question because I'm sure there's a reason they don't do this, but I really wish they would. They only have a few full replays per day, and the rest are either race replays or very short highlights.

It's sort of annoying to me because I'd like to catch up on every Olympic performance that was on in the middle of the night. Most of these Olympics take place too late for most Australians to watch, so why not put them all in full on 9Now? I'm also an immigrant, and the problem with the highlights is that they usually don't show my home country's athletes or their wins.

*Is* there a reason 9Now doesn't do this?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Simple.

They want you to $$$ for Stan
They want you to pay for Stan (their own ott platform)
It's sad how little footage you get to see off the Olympics away from the licensed channels.

I tried finding a clip of the Turkish guy who aced it in a shooting contest. You'll find images and a few short snippets, but the whole segment? Nope.
For free?? 

In 2024??
Desperate to watch the women’s team Archery replay and the 9 now highlights package was absolute rubbish. Showed one arrow from the gold medal match…one arrow :(
There are heaps of full replays go to categories, 2024 Olympic sports and then find the sport you want
Money. It cost them truck loads of cash to cover all sports, all of the the time. If it was all on 9Now for free, what does STAN offer those who want to pay, beyond no ads? They want to give people a reason to go to STAN and spend.
Weird, because when I mentioned I was watching on Stan everyone on here started chiming in about how it was all on 9Now for free.
To those saying they want you to pay for Stan, they don't have all the events on Stan. 

I tried to watch Jess and Noemie Fox events from last night and it said, "this event is no longer available"
Honestly 9now has done a great job of having everything available to watch live- slimmer pickings from replays but it does help
Because Stan.
Money.  IOC has a cash cow and is milking it for all it's worth.  Oh, they have wonderful coverage, that they paid a lot for but if they let everyone film it they would get a lot more coverage and a lot more interesting, not just Disneyfied perfect shots.

But it also means many people hardly see it and are losing interest in it.  

If the main aim of the IOC is to make money, they are doing well.  If the main aim is to show it to the world, not so much.  

I'll just bet the athletes themselves don't get anywhere near a share of that rich gold mine.
Yeah, most likely Stan has paid for those rights
It's a disgrace. I remember watching the 'replay' of the Matilda's versus Zambia game when they won 6-5 and the 9Now app only showed the goals. No set up and no game play, only the goals. It was like amateur hour editing. Go fuck yourselves Channel 9.
Shit coverage
Except Stan didn’t even have all the matches of all the events and it pissed me off so much
In fairness, this is reasonable. 

Go back to the 2000s/2010s, and all you had was just what one single channel chose to air. If you happen to have another nationality close to your heart, you are shit outta luck.
They don’t have all the full replays on Stan though? Have you seen that advertised somewhere?

Edit: I’m wrong
The IOC funds the games from TV rights to a large extent - Paris organising committee gets €750m from the IOC. This is why they strictly protect the Media Rights Holder interests.
The best, most advanced Olympics coverage ever, with on-demand streams of every single event, live and on replay, and 100% ad-free? For just $15?

I'll take a brilliant paid solution instead of the free, choiceless, aussie-dominated and ad-driven coverage of yesteryear.
You can say that across the board for all the less popular sports, it was just counting and reporting medals and quick results summary  with no real coverage.  The people who won the contract are just cherry picking their coverage for maximum returns which is fair enough since they just a business like the IOC. However I would have thought that there is a clause to provide full coverage in some way of all events. Its amusing  that  you can get more effective   coverage from various sources on Youtube than from the coverage contract winner in Australia. I hardly watched any of the coverage from local sources because in my view the coverage was so poor.

The other point is that the local coverage seems to lack  enthusiasm and passion which they not interested in. Their coverage is bland and they approaching it like they are doing the weather. Just no creative imagination. Money has ruined all sports coverage in Australia to be frank its shit.
On stan though, not 9Now
This is the answer
Well it crashes every two or three minutes if I attempt to chromecast it to my TV so that's making me consider stan as I am very tired of watching awesome stuff happen on my tiny phone screen.
Every event is on 9Now, the catch is you can only watch it live. Only a select few events have a full replay on demand.
The time trial? That's working for me
Sometimes they are just lost in the system, sort of like filed incorrectly. EG I couldn't watch the Women's Triathlon, then I tried a few wrong things, and suddenly found it.
I did look into Stan to see if they had every full replay there. Good to have confirmation, but shocking that even if you pay for a subscription you still can't watch every event.
Stan is 50% owned by nine, it's not a rights thing it's that nine would be competing with themselves if they offered that.

Nine has the live events, Stan has the replays.
I think the Olympic organisation is cracking down on coverage licences - it might be that to do what OP is asking requires a very expensive contract.
I have seen and confirm they have all the replays. Also for stuff like the gymnastics all-around they have the separate feeds for each apparatus (without commentary though). You can also get diff language feeds for some sports (maybe all but idk)
They do, was well as minis (\~30 mins) and rapid recaps (\~5 mins).
Have to give it to Stan here, the coverage  is actually pretty amazing.
Yes I don't know why people are so against paying for good products these days. The companies need to make money, I'd rather just pay them than watch hundreds of ads or have them sell my data.
That’s on top of the Stan subscription though which a lot of people don’t have
For the cost of two coffees you can get around 100hrs of entertainment but it's still just too expensive LOL
$36
Did you watch last Olympics? 7 was free and had everything and everything worked.
That’s how to find replays on 9Now.
Yeah. It keeps saying, "Sorry, this title is no longer available on Stan. Code X29"
No, you're mistaken. Stan has live events.

Nobody's paying $15 purely for replays. It offers every single event live or on-demand post event.
They didn’t even have it live though, insane to me
Better than I expected. If it'd been Kayo, it would have been glitchy and useless.
Seriously. This whole event is so expensive to put on. I won't pay $60 or more for a fight pay-per-view, but this is weeks of entertainment for a reasonable price.
Then it's $30 or so. The Olympics cost billions to put on. It's very reasonable.

And again, 9Now is there for the rest.
Some of them have full replays, most of them only have highlights.
>Nobody's paying $15 purely for replays. It offers every single event live or on-demand post event.

When the live event is at 2am they are.

Yes, Stan has the live events too, but on demand is their killer feature as nine also has the events live.
Often they are, given the time zone.
The IOC has the most aggressive copyright and sharing rights for what is supposed to be a non-profit.
Kayo is such a terribly designed and outdated app and always has been. It's good to see other apps adopting more sports now and doing it better. The cricket on Amazon prime was excellent as well
They're not paying that much just for replays, though. They may only be *using* the replay function, but the product they're paying for is a live streaming service with additional on-demand replays.

Besides, the events start at 5pm. You'd really have to be fussy to find nothing you wanted to watch live.
The money paid by national broadcasters funds the IOC, Olympic Broadcast Services (in house host broadcasting service) and a significant block grant to the host organising committee - more than $A1bn (€750m).
Both it and binge are just rubbish.
> You'd really have to be fussy to find nothing you wanted to watch live.

If your goal is to watch the Olympics because you want to beat your chest and feel like a real man because Australia won a gold medal or pretend you care about this shit because you're supposed to care you can find *something* on at 5 pm.

But you can find *something* on for free on nine.

If you want to watch a particular sport, because you actually care about that sport and not about the gigantic dick waving contest that is the medal tally then you're stuck with what's actually on, and the good stuff isn't going to be on at that time because it's 9 in the morning Paris time.
Binge is better than it used to be but trying to find shit to watch in both apps is such a pain in the arse.
I disagree.

I'm here to watch the best athletes in an array of novelty sports, regardless of nationality. You can keep your oddly gendered chest beating and waving of dicks. Not something I'm familiar with.

I've barely watched Australians compete at all, and there's plenty to watch between 5pm and bed time. All sorts of interesting stuff, from every type of event.

Of course we miss some good stuff, but it's really not like they're hoarding all the 'good' events for 2am.
>Of course we miss some good stuff, but it's really not like they're hoarding all the 'good' events for 2am.

They're not hoarding anything, the Olympics held in France are holding the most popular events at times when French people can watch them, because the Olympics are in their country and they paid for them.
The point is the live stuff is also all free on 9 Now though (with no advertising too) so literally by paying for Stan all you’re getting is replays.
But there's also plenty of good stuff on during the Paris day - it's not *all* in their evenings.

I mean, the men's gold medal tennis match is on at 8pm our time tomorrow. That's our prime time, not theirs. It couldn't be more perfect for us.
