
Doesn’t really say why, just that it is.
The title is a bit misleading, since most languages in the world don't have gendered pronouns. Looking only at European languages gives a misleading impression (and the European languages that are not Indo-European such as Hungarian and Finnish also lack gendered pronouns).
To be fair, the article totally failed on explaining the why... I am a native german speaker and hang out with indigenous people from all over the top end... and this article just says yeh.. people have language... and its different.. ah... yep. failing to see the comparison to german being relevant, since the languages are so diverse and different and gendered pronouns just being an odditiy among countless world languages.
Well to be fair it’s not like all our pronouns are gendered. So it’s not like it’s a hard requirement
Interesting read, especially how some parts of the body have the vegetable gender. That reads odd but it makes sense in the context the article provides.
Thanks for sharing, interesting read.
Obviously because its completely bullshit. These terms are "new" in respectful regards to attention seeking behaviour. I'm sure in respect to any history of any kind, pronouns weren't a thing
It's TheConversation so you shouldn't be surprised.
It would be interesting to see why the variations, but I think that would take a good few more articles.
Reminded me of this, the fruits are designated male

https://herbalistics.com.au/product/marsdenia-australis-silky-pear-plant/
Thanks
So you’re not a nominalist.
The conversation that goes nowhere
Should only take 1 if they get to the point
the fact that your thanks is garnering downvotes.. wow... reddit is fucked ay.
Right, don’t waste energy thinking about it.
A lot of people are tired of hearing about gender but where do you go to avoid hearing about it now?
Perhaps to different cultures which don’t create such irrelevancies?
That was **this** culture until about 20 years ago.
Well that’s not true, is it?
Yes it is and I remember
