I am just listening Radio New Zealand International from Melbourne about Olympic Games. Extremely strong signal, which is not very common. Suddenly feeling a pity and Shane that Australia does not have a national short wave radio coverage. I guess it doesn’t really cost much.
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-02-28/abc-boss-grilled-in-senate-estimates-over-axe-to-shortwave/8312200
Just send them a fax or telex and tell them how disappointed you are.
"doesn't really cost much"

That's where you're wrong. Transmitters aren't cheap to buy, run, or maintain.

The content can be cheap, but not the gear.
Apart from yourself, how many people do you estimate would use this if it was still there?
There's not a lot on the shortwave frequencies nowadays anyway, unfortunately. Mostly various Chinese stations (broadcasting in different languages, including English), it seems.
When I went backpacking through Asia in the 90's, best thing I had was a SW radio. Listening to the cricket while treking in the Malaysian rainforest... Priceless
BBC runs short wave services, I suspect that's so that people in countries with media restrictions can receive international news updates:


https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/2x9tqt6mc05vB2S37j8MWMJ/global-short-wave-frequencies
As linked, we did, but the brilliant minds at the ABC shut it down. Everyone has internet you know. /s
Well, it's in the name. NZ doesn't have a 'national' short wave service either. Few countries do.

Don't know too many Australians who can't listen to regular ABC Radio.

It's a shame ABC doesn't really have a Pacific/international service anymore, but it was never going to include Olympics coverage :)
DEAR ALBO STOP

WE NEED SHORT WAVE STOP

BRING BACK ABC SHORTWAVE STOP
There's a lot of people who have limited capability to receive a fax

Not everybody in Australia lives within reach of a phone service - and not everybody that the SW service targeted was in Australia
It costs us $4M /year to transmit from what I remember. Please correct me if that's incorrect.


You might think, put that into something more useful, but that undervalues what we got from having shortwave.  


Apart from being a simple, reliable way to send information to the more remote parts of Australia (fuck internet reception in an emergency), it also provided us with some soft power with our neighbours, who aren't always going to align with us on geopolitical matters. For those who don't know, sw can transmit thousands of kilometres.


Put it this way: when we stopped transmitting on those frequencies, China took up the slack within a few months. Anyone who was used to hearing Australian opinion/news on that channel now got Chinese opinions/news.
It was an important conduit to allow others in the Asia-Pacific region to be exposed to Australian culture and news - as well as providing emergency broadcasts to people in remote regions beyond the reach of AM or FM broadcasts (now handled by BOM on shortwave - but not any other programming)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio_Australia
This is what Turnbull said. I also like to remind people that the L/NP cut a lot of budget out of the international missions for Australia that included Radio Australia. They did this without informing the minister for dfat… or did they, given the number of portfolios scomo held.
VAST is not internet.
$4 million was what the ABC chair said it was going to save by stopping SW broadcasts.

You're right about where we get opinions and news. Perhaps the ABC could spend the money on Starlink terminals for people who are affected.  That way they can listen to ABC radio and watch ABC TV.
??? That is the point, we had something that gave some current  news and then we had crickets as to what was happening in the country.
