
Katter was right
Why is someone going into the water in far North Queensland?

Stupidity.
[let a thousand blossoms bloom](https://youtu.be/1i739SyCu9I?si=jrrK1HoX0lJAhvA_)
I think he meant corporate crocodiles.
🤫
Bahahaha
The article says he fell in from the bank while fishing and never resurfaced. If it was a croc it must have been waiting right in front of him for him to come to the water so he was probably in the same spot for a while
He was a smart guy and my doctor. Nicest bloke I've ever met. Second time he's been to that exact spot. He wasn't fishing the embankment collapsed him walking around and he lost his life.

Fuckwitt
At the top of the article

"Emergency services were called after a 40-year-old man entered the water and failed to resurface at the Annan River Bridge in Cooktown just after 2pm on Saturday."

At the bottom

Initial investigations indicate the man had been fishing on the riverbank, when he fell into the water and failed to resurface.

1. It's stupid to mention he fell in at the bottom, not the top. 

2. You've read it that he fell in,  went under once, and was gone. I'd suggest he fell in, and at some stage went under, and didn't come back up. Be nice if the article suggested some time frames.
To them, a person is just a slightly different shaped piece of moving prey, I have a deal with the crocs, I don't eat them, they don't eat me.
Yeah, I guess it’s probably just based on what the cops have told them and they can be pretty sparse with details so soon after an event I guess they don’t want to say something that’s not correct or paints anyone in a bad light unnecessarily. This only happened a few hours before the article was published and any witnesses/family must be distraught
That's only works out if you stay out of the water.

Crocs have zero deal with you.
I eat them first.
I feel it's poor writing to have that he accidentally fell in at the bottom of the article, whatever the case.
Newspapers were written with the important stuff at the top.  Online articles start with a teaser, click-bait headline and drip feed details all the way to the end of the article, because the longer you spend reading, the more ads you might click.  So this is exactly the kind of writing the publication wants.
