
Everything else aside, who's walking in to salvos with $400 to spend on boots?
Tell ‘em they’re dreamin’
For $400 I might as well buy a completely brand new pair of shoes without someone's stink. I know these shoes have a cult following but I guarantee there's a pair of real leather boots out there for $400 that would be just as good
The other week a lady posted on our local Facebook page that a Kmart basic T-shirt was selling for $9 at Salvos (Kmart was selling it for $2.5). It seems that some op shops are no longer the place for people who struggle to shop.
That’s a r/ThriftGrift
Salvos have gone from not knowing things worth and under charging to now thinking everything is worth a fortune.
Same cost as a new pair with a minor defect from the outlet stores
Salvos taking the piss with their pricing these days 

Can often get these boots for sub $500 new
I went in to a local salvos and they had the exact pair of shorts I was wearing on the rack second hand. Checked the price and it was double what I paid new. I've never been back in there since and that was 9yrs ago
I went in there the other day and I noticed there were price tags that included ‘sells for $x on eBay’ with a price close to it. I’m thinking this ain’t eBay, where I’d go looking for specific items. I can’t get it posted. Anyone can make up a price on eBay and just because  it’s advertised at that price, it doesn’t mean people are willing to pay that.
I saw a pair of Spanish leather boots in a Lifeline, they wanted $120 for them. I took them tob the counter and said 'is this the right price? The rubber sole is actually crumbling they're so old!' she says 'yep, they are over $300 new'

So I go and research - said shoe company went bust over 5 years ago, and this shoe was on their now lifeless FB page from 8 years ago. So an op shop, that was given these for nothing, wants to use poor research to price an item, and then have it sit (I kept a check on them) on their shelf for over 6 months. I was so tempted to calculate the real estate cost of this but couldn't bring myself to invest any further time. 

Now here I am lamenting about it again!!!

TL:DR - Op shops take the piss because they think they can use the interwebs to research their pricing.
I went to salvos earlier this week and watched a young lady with 2 kids counting coins to pay for her kitchen crockery and kids toys to the point that the guy behind her just said “I’ll pay for it don’t worry about it love”. Some people actually need these stores to get by, but they’re starting to be inaccessible to those who truly need it.
Wtf, I paid $400 for my factory seconds boots at DFO (albeit 6ish yrs ago)
I knew the brand is popular with farmers and wanna be framers (usually people driving in oversized utes).

I now had to double check how much their boots are and HOLY MOLEY they're expensive 🤯  
But, I'll also say that charging 50% of the sticker price at an Op Shop is ridiculous.
While donating some food to the local foodbank while cleaning out my mums place, the discussion came up about where I would take the rest of her stuff that was still good. Very nice and very appreciative lady there suggested I do not donate to the Salvo's cause they priced goods significantly higher than other charities around town
I work in an op shop at the moment (not Salvos) and that is too much even by our standards, even if it was new. Our recommended price guide for an item like that \*new\* is minimum 20% of retail, but we usually go with 25%.

There's no way used shoes should ever be more than $100. We've had flash used Italian designer shoes in our shop that would retail as much as those boots new and we put $35 on them, from memory. We'd probably put $50 on these for the middle aged "pearls with a polo shirt" crowd, because the brands like RM Williams and Country Road are crazy popular with those who look like they have more than enough money to buy them new. (I'm based in the country.)

Seriously though, I'm just a lowly casual, but I wish my job didn't exist (putting aside that my disability means they're about the only people who'd hire me). The running costs of op shops are going up in part due to the increase in waged staff, and the prices are rising to support that. Why do they have waged staff? Because we can't get the volunteers. In our shop, we have a grand total of one volunteer under the age of 60. (She's in her 20s and works full time, but just likes the atmosphere of working in the shop.)

Volunteers are regularly those calling for cheaper prices on items, but the ways charities work these days - namely, a very centralised model - mean that it's usually head office calling the shots on price guides that don't always make sense.
One owner?
Two years ago I found wonderful {really, so comfortable} R M Williams boots for $25 at Vinnies..  
Change in pricing policy?
Couldn’t pay me $400 to wear RM Williams. Do you want to look like a 20yr old private school boy trying to get a job at macquarie bank?
I went into one of these stores on the weekend. I saw a kmart mug they were trying to sell for $14.00. It made me question the pricing on everything else!
Salvos and most OP Shops have lost the plot.
When I go op shopping and find treasure, only to find it has eBay "last sold" pricing - I think there is no fury greater. They get the goods for nothing; I went to the effort of hunting for it = fuck off. If I wanted eBay, I wouldn't leave my couch.

Price the stuff as it should be - second hand used goods.
Smelly, used shoes for $400, what an absolute bargain!
I can smell it from here
I own two pairs of RMs. There is no world where I’m buying those
Those boots also need a resole… which will bring the total to ~$560
The Salvation Army have forgotten what they are there for. They are just scammers now.
Even at $4 I'd still say gross as I walked past them. Eww.
Salvos are the worst for OP shop pricing.
I’ve seen used kids sneakers, Kmart brand, more expensive than new at Kmart.
I mean just steal them and leave a $50 on the counter at this point. You’re literally buying someone’s old sweaty boots. When did everything become about fleecing everyone else? We are better than this.
A new pair cost 640 fml salvo workers are fooked. They are given the clothes/shoes for free. Better to sell the product at 70 and someone buying it then at 400. I miss the 2000’s op shops. 90’s were even better
I can see them walking out the door....in a backpack.
I volunteer at Salvos myself and would never price anything this high understanding the purpose of an op shop 

But in saying this, you still need to value items to be able to move stock on free up the shelves for more donations 

I would but this somewhere between $80-$100 considering the condition, brand and durability
Salvation Army Employment Plus. They make people homeless and suicide for profit. Oh and use forced slave labour in their stores. Gouls and feinds lost to their messianic happy clapping illusions.
$400 boots is an outright scam
My best scores at OP shops: a pair of mid shin doc Martens for $70 (just broken in) thankful for the wasteful person. Second was a Rhinoleather motorcycle jacket retailing about $400 at the time for $50 brand new with the tags still on it (probs a gift that someone didn't like the old school style of).

You still get the unicorns people it's worth a poke when you get the chance.
That's a lot of money to spend on second hand shoes that tell the world you work in an office but are ashamed of it
Tamworth NSW represent!
Salvos pre-Covid was great.

Now it’s just absolute junk or ridiculous pricing.
Salvo's eBay anything of actual value (after it goes through staffs personal gank filter) and the left over makes it to the physical shop. Adult clothes whatever, but it's an op shop mate, the kids cloths should be cheap at the minimum to help local community. Nope, in our country Salvo's the kids cloths are cheaper in Kmart/Big W than second hand. The non busted toy prices have also "adjusted to inflation", can't imagine how much they would cost if they weren't given for free. 

(Sauce for the slander : A Salvo's manager and my personal experiences I've witnessed.)
Rip the tag off and walk out, they’re asking for it. $400 for a pair of shoes at an op shop, what the hell is happening to Australia.
You can go to the rm Williams econds store and get them half that price😉🤣🤣

They aren't craftsman's....
salvos is a scam
these stupid "charity" business's need to fuck off. they're not helping anyone. clothing dumpsters that are landfill and ruin local textile; and administration costs that raise zero profit. Just die already.
Tell him he’s dreaming!
r/thriftgrift would love this
I have two pairs of RM’s and even at $400 they’re overpriced. I wouldn’t buy them again.
And its called a charity store; yeah right.
$400 to get tinea or foot disease.

I thought the salvo's was a non for profit organization they would have got these boots for nothing
And they got them for free, cheating mongrels, wheres the charity in that?
I’m pretty sure the black boot next to them is the same as the ones in a Les Norton episode
If they’re ariats next to them they’re probably 300 bucks cheaper and more comfortable
get two pairs of fresh tn’s for that
I can imagine some delusional seller on gumtree thinking they could get that price, but come on salvos do better
Put a different tag on it and go to a register where you know that person doesn't know anything or doesn't care
I got a steal at lifeline a week ago. There were also a pair of RMW boots I went to look at after a tip off but they were the wierd furry looking things and the wrong size anyway. Just as I went to leave, I saw a hat with the Oracle logo on it that looked funky. Turns out it was an essentially brand new 2024 Red Bull Racing with the special edition livery used that race weekend. The hat was at most a month old given the uniqueness of the design. They retail for ~$70 (which is ridiculously expensive for a hat), I snagged it for $10.
I’m never paying $400 for someone else’s shoes
Got mine for $5, at a privately owned op shop
I'm surprised these are even in store. 

I though the Salvos and Vinnies now sold this kind of stuff on ebay.

The Op shops I go to are a bit hit and miss. There's one in the town near me where the prices are quite high.

I think they cash in with people taking a trip up the coast from Sydney on a weekend.
Oh yeah, in Tamworth was ya?
Wtf? Used to be $89 for a pair of lacky siders.
Salvos has always been overpriced. Those boots are collectors items. I don't go to these stores anymore because they no longer cater for needy people.
I got a genuine pair (still in the box) at a Vinnies a few years ago for $50. What a dream
Salvos has lost it's mind
Far out. That’s wild.

Maybe rack them?
I’ve worked near a big Salvos in Melbourne for many years and two things I’ve noticed you see less of now is Stephen King books and vinyl that isn’t trash. They’ve definitely worked out there’s more to be made with eBay/collectors.
Leather boots mould to the shape of the wearers foot. These are essentially the most-expensive, most-uncomfortable, foot-problem inducing pair of leather boots you'll ever own.
So they get for free and charge $400 for a pair of boots? I thought they are “not for profit”!! Silly me.
It’s likely the real boot that inspired the simpsons boot kicking a butt flag
If they've been worn they're worn into someone's foot. Not really worth anything second hand if they've been worn too much
I memba I used to be able to afford clothes at salvos. Now resellers has made it it into any other store.

Fucking disgraceful.
Rip the tag off and take them to the counter and ask the little old lady how much, she’ll say $25 and everyone’s a winner. Little trick I learnt when shit was massively overpriced in op shops.
Not even fresh or designer, don’t know where they’re getting the nerve to charge 4 hunna
Salvos supposedly a non-profit, charitable organisation. Definitely charging overs on what they would have paid for them.
Update: The boots have either sold or been taken off the shelf. The black ones are still there for $200 though.
They defs all stoped being opportunity shops and are now just money hungry
Salves are a disgrace these days, donated items selling for as much as brand new items, they have lost there way and need to remember why they were created to begin with
Literally have a pair of these and was flabbergasted at this price. Wtf
Whoaw! Who would be spending that much on used shoes? Even the new pair on a “Sales” day or wholesales is cheaper than these…
Let’s just remember that op shops are there to fund the community services they operate, not specifically to provide cheap goods to middle class people. 

Let’s hope they sell them to someone who wants to save a bit of $$ on a pair of RMs, and they put that money to good use.
Try Vinnies they are more reasonable and understand times are tough
400 hundred dollarydoos?!?!
$400 bucks for the privilege to wear what is most likely a pair deadman's shoes? 

Yeah, nah..
Also just gonna pop this here, salvos are homophobic. Lot of other charities to support.
Blame the morons who go op-shopping for stuff to resell.  They would go to stores like the Salvos, buy anything that might be worth more than what the Salvos were asking for and leave the rest.  People would stop coming into the Salvos stores because anything worth buying was already bought out.
Damn, why they so expensive
at that price they must be made for walking down the runway to show off
I wonder how much the black pair are going for?
Lol maybe was $40 or just like a lady in FB asking someone to pay 2400/week just because she was away a few weeks.

Worst part is that her flat is just very ordinary two bedrooms no even beach view lol
🤠🤠 Tamworth mentioned 🤠🤠
Everything the Op shops sell is cheaper new at Kmart or Aldi,
These boots need new heels Heaven knows the state of the Soles. $250-$300 would be a fair price. Anyone willing to spend That much money om these is an idiot!
They go for 200 on marketplace
Old skool RMs - bargain.  If made in last 5 years, one worth $250 brand new
Cubbies is better. Salvos rents too high. Plus they’re wierd
Wow. Not a typo? Maybe it's supposed to be $4?
This is exactly what I've come to expect from them.
Can OP pan the camera around a bit? Those other boots lookin cute too.
Have they increased in price or something?

I got my RJ Williams a few years ago and I think they were about $500 brand new at the time. $400 for a used pair seems rather steep.
Hey Salvos "Workers" 
(Who Google Image Search things instead of labelling with fair second hand prices like the previous workers.) :

Original Price ≠ Op Shop Price
Is that a pair of R.M's "Santa Fe" boots next to them?
They feel they have to put up prices because they are given budgets to meet at risk of their shops being shut down. They routinely fail to meet these budgets at even the busiest shops. There is also a lot of theft. Most shops get stolen from every day. Managers are under constant pressure. They don't own any of their own buildings naturally and its a struggle to keep them safe and usable. Many experience severe damage in wild weather and landlords are often reluctant to perform repairs. It's likely that money could be better used at the top of the Salvo's hierarchy but at the shop level, they're under permanent threat of being shut down like in Clayton.
They'll get nicked by the end of the day. No doubt.
It's rare they come in threes!
“That’s why we don’t go to salvos”
$200 for an old tweed jacket at my local salvos the other day , absolute joke , selling fantastic furniture for more than they are worth brand new
\~$650 new.
I thought these were $450 new
There are high end Vinnies now which only have select items -- sometimes in the same suburb as a regular Vinnies. This is the case for instance in Surry Hills in Sydney. The Crown Street one (in the old Commonwealth Bank building) specialises in pricey fashion things -- clothing, kitchenware etc.
This is why I don’t donate anything more “expensive” or “valuable” over at op shops anymore. I’ll just sell it myself on Depop or marketplace for a fair price
They are ghastly! Who wants to pay even $4.00 on these?
Lol just buy new.
I wandered into Vinnies and Salvos recently and was really surprised at how expensive everything was. As someone not working at the moment, it was pretty disappointing. I remember back in the mid 90's, got my first job and needed a pair of black pants, we were poor. Got a great pair at Vinnie's for $2. The good ol' days
Spend another $100 and get new ones
Surely you can buy new RM’s for that price?? That seems ridiculous.
i wouldn’t pay more than 50 for those.
This is why I throw my old stuff out instead of donating oh look a place getting free product off customers to then resell at close to brand new prices that won’t pay staff because it takes advantage of the elderly who want to help or do good but I guess fuck the poor and struggling people who rely on these places for there clothes and furniture etc
Are they even that much brand new?
Salvos has gone to shit
Wow, and to think I sold my BRAND NEW, NEVER WORN pair for $380 just 6 months ago. I could have gouged them so much harder!
Got mine from an op shop for 40, were brand new.
... I sware the soul has been glued back on, zoom in on the toes. These things are shagged.
I contacted them on facebook today to ask why they have become so greedy, instantly blocked.
JESUS CHRIST! That’s sinful!
Op shops aren’t the same since the rise of online reselling. They now have to price higher to avoid people coming in, buying everything vaguely good in one fell swoop and selling it online for 3 times the price.
Even Salvos is dealing with inflation
LOL
I bought a pair for $80 in Vinnies
God almighty they’re having a lend
RM Williams factory seconds would be better at that price.
We having a saying in the Southern United States for wildly overpriced things. “ they’re mighty proud of those”
People think they don't judge people by how they look. 

As one of the poors, the Salvos was one of the only chances we had to get nice clothes that we could wear to an interview, a family outing, or god forbid, as clothing for daily use. It was cheap, and you still kind of felt bad, but gracious to be wearing a rich mans clothes so you had an opportunity at a job interview, or not be looked down on because you are wearing a target tshirt. 

I'm sure no one does look down on people who are wearing cheap clothing when they are at job interviews, rental inspections, or doctors appointments though.
That sucks, poor people deserve label second hand boots too
🤢
Its not an op shop anymore, its a business.

Give your money to charities that are, fuck the salvos
@ Everyone getting upset at the price -which yes, IMHO it should be around 250 in our store-    If those boots were priced at 100 or less, they wouldn't be sitting there on the shelf, waiting for a regular person to find a bargin. No, in most of the op shops, dealers come in and snap up anything they can resell for a profit.  Some of them come in multiple times a day. 

The op shop is there to raise funds for the charity, not to provide dealers with bargins to make a living.
Some special consideration for broken-in shoes.
That’s saving hundreds of dollars compared to new ones
Vegans buy used leather shoes so they can still feel superior
That's not far off the Marketplace price for a pair, little on the high side.
Cheap. These are $650 plus when new and they’ll rebuild them for you when you wear them out. Yep, expensive but they are lifetime./S
Rich hipsters cosplaying being poor.
My guess is no one and when they don’t sell a volunteer will grab a bargain.
Paddington one for sure
You aren't?
What do you mean everything else aside? Isn’t that the whole point of the post
People,who know they can onsell them for $600.
Even Gina needs opportunities. Sure, she may own R M Williams, but a rich person doesn’t stay rich by wearing the stock.
Had some salvos bitch try to sell me a pair of old basketball shoes that smelled like a wet gym bag and had all their tread worn off plus holes for $50. 

She wouldn't take 35 for them just so I could play some fucking street ball. She said they were collectables for fucks sake.
Air jordans would be 4 figures.
Boomers with no taste but plenty of cash
Jousting sticks??
ergonomic chairs?
That’s going straight to the poolroom
Scooped it out the punnet
I think it’s an extra $100 for brand new ones lol would rather pay the extra than use someone elses
Out of interest I just checked.

New pair like these are $629.
If you go to an outlet store, you can get a new pair for $450. Granted, they may have a absolutely tiny scratch (hence why it was sent to the outlet) but it's otherwise brand new. Theres an outlet store in Melbourne city if anyone is looking for a pair
Redbacks. $120 and they'll last 10 years, plus you won't look like a yuppy farm cosplayer.
I got my pair of Solovairs in Civic for less than that: [https://uk.nps-solovair.com/products/s8-551-bg-g?countrycode=AU](https://uk.nps-solovair.com/products/s8-551-bg-g?countrycode=AU)
Doc Martin’s are literally half that price depending on where you go
We at Fortescue also get yearly 20% discount from twiggy himself. Brings it down to ~$500
Thomas Cook shoes sell for 300-350 brand new. I've never owned one but I've heard people say they feel exactly like the R M Williams ones, but don't last quite as long

https://thestabledoor.com.au/products/thomas-cook-mens-trentham-cushion-tech-boot-chestnut
Some people buy consumer goods just for the brand label.

Check out this $184 t-shirt - https://www.culturekings.com.au/products/supreme-small-box-t-shirt-lavendar
My work gave me a pair of the signature craftsman boots. I got told they're over 1k. 

I'd never buy them for myself, but if these are worth the same, I can see them selling for $200 or more.
New ones aren't that much more and you get the perfect fit as well as a warranty
Rossi boots are the one
Birkenstocks makes epic male leather boots for $380. Little known fact.
Not really, it is nice have a proper pair of RM’s
I never thought that the target was people who were struggling. My understanding of op shops is they are there to raise money that goes to people that are struggling.
Friend used to work at one, the "official" reason is that their rents are too high so the prices need to be high
No, you go to the charity and ask for financial assistance. The OP shop is a fund raising arm for the charity.
They sold something I gifted to the shop ( like for the staff to keep not to resell) for $5 that I’d got at Kmart for $1.50
I visited my local Vinnies yesterday and found a grotesque amount of Shein shirts and dresses for roughly 15-14$.
Op shops  raise money for the poor, and give discounts/gift vouchers/free clothing to the poor.
Nah they’re for resellers and people cosplaying being poor. Jacking up the prices is the reason I quit working at Vinnies
This sub is pure rage porn.
I read that as ThriftGift and was wondering why each post just pissed me off
Tbh I thought I’d get people negotiating down when I put my 11 year old RMs up for sale for $200 (they’d been re-soled for $150 just before I stopped wearing them) and I could have sold them multiple times. So they might have gone for $400. They were in much better condition than this pair too.
Yes, the one next to Melbourne airport.. they are $400 new.. Essendon
> Can often get these boots for sub $500 new

Even at full retail $649, you'd be an idiot to buy an used pair for $400.
Cheaper to go to Kmart for that stuff these days than op shops.
Exactly, it's not like inflation has changed much in 6 years
They never used to be that bad. Until maybe 10 or so years ago they were like $400 new but would last a lifetime if you looked after them. 

They then started to reposition as a luxury fashion brand.
Surgeons too I hear.
More than 50% - these boots are $650 new as listed on their website. It's nearly 2/3rds the full retail price...
It's also popular with lawyers and finance bros now. Maybe not the exact style pictured in the photo, but they have been picked up by the fancy corporates, who will absolutely pay inflated prices for them.
And public servants. Walk around any government department and I guarantee you'll see multiple pairs.
Wanna be farmers is right, most farmers I know where steel cap zip ups. Most you should ever pay is $200
These ones aren’t that expensive. They sell for $650 brand new from RM. So not even 50%.
As an avid op shopper, I can tell you there has been a change in the way op shops have been pricing items in the last 5 years. There has been a little bit of education given to the staff, to try and limit possible financial opportunities from being missed. 

The issue is that it means some things are way over-valued. Regularly I will see Kmart items more expensive in the op shop than brand new.

My position on this is, noting how much up-cycling is happening and how some businesses have exploited the op shops for years, it's only smart for the opshop to do the upcycling itself. But some prices are just dumb.
In my experience Vinnies has always been much cheaper than Salvos
Mine set me back $50. Perfrect fit, top condition.
Gentrification of thrifting coupled with greed.
Wrangle a few spreadsheets
I had a pair bought for me and I’m a wear runners everyday kinda guy. They are incredibly comfortable shoes.
yeah in younger circles these days it's assumed people wearing RM Williams that aren't from the country are almost always total cunts.

There are plenty of fancy luxury footwear brands, & there are plenty of good work/tradie brands, but unless the person is 50+ and bought them in the good old days, or live in woop-woop and use them for farming, they're generally a wanky toff in finance/law with some al-qaeda adjacent views about women chambered for when they get one beer in.

Big generalisation, but haven't found an exception yet. A pair of RM business casual boots, and a ralph lauren polo? Enduring this self-confident idiot will be the lowpoint of any job or function.
Some visitor will buy them during the country music festival for sure. Most city slickers think they’re the quintessential country shoe and somehow don’t realise they’re actually only worn by the type of farmers that regularly attend charity balls.
I always assumed Tony Abbott started that trend? 
Or maybe I just never noticed the Sydney hobnobs etc wear those boots to look “rustic”.

I distinctly recall a news article about him wearing them to a formal political meeting or something… could be wrong
Well that's a step up from child abusers.
You know the money from the boots goes to the charity work they do right? 

Like the salvos absolutely have issues, but the more they make from the op shops, the more that they have to use for their charity work. And while yes, shoes are a necessity, designer leather boots are not. 

I hate to defend the salvos, because they have a track record of discrimination in providing their services. But I really don't think THIS specifically is a huge issue. Inflation affects charities too, they also have to cover the increased costs of providing their services somehow.
Just last week I got [this Forever New purse](https://www.forevernew.com.au/lea-diamante-pouch-258744) for $13 from my local Salvos
Knew this store right away, the shoes have been here longer than I have. On the other hand I got brand new Blundstones at Talking Threads for $50 lol
knew someone who worked in one before covid - in addition to the wealthy people *'cosplaying poor'* and ruining thrift stores for the average person, some volunteer staff would apparently see it as a business and not a charity shop - so the margins had to reflect the labour of sorting and pricing - with the original items RRP as a basis. 

Yes, as you're probably thinking that is dumb and completely defeats the purpose and appeal of an OP-shop. If general churn and recycling is discouraged because it's suddenly trendy to sell dad's beat-up old NewBalance trainers for $200, I worry about what happens when the tiktok & trustfund crowd are no longer going to Vinnies and Salvos, and the rest of us have learned that it's no cheaper than just buying something new anymore.
Overpopulation
Eh? In 2024? Surely you jest.
What brands do you suggest?
The middle class hipsters trying to buy cheap shit in OP shops aren’t supposed to be the recipients of the charity.

The OP shop exists to fundraise for the *actual* charity.

That said, these are clearly overvalued by someone who has done no research or is taking the piss. They look like trash and you can get a brand new pair for like an extra $150-$200
the people who buy stuff in their stores aren't supposed to be the recipients of their charity. 

the charity is provided to people in need, and *it is funded* by people who buy stuff from the store.
That's called stealing.
Yes
https://www.news.com.au/lifestyle/fashion/fashion-trends/expensive-salvos-price-tag-proves-aussies-cant-even-afford-op-shops/news-story/7c76499dd4f43d27d9a06898bd06e310


Congrats mate, news.com.au stole ur story 🤣
> Let’s just remember that op shops are there to fund the community services they operate, not specifically to provide cheap goods to middle class people.

Historically they served both and weren't merely a vehicle to extract as much money from the community as possible (nor pay very high wages to those running the charity)

For many decades they were thrift stores, intended to provide affordable goods to the community, rather than high-priced brand-name items.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charity_shop
IMHO, they would make more money by selling things cheaper and moving them quicker. Trying to sell second hand product at 80% of retail price for new product will mean less shoppers. 
I recently went to all three shops in my area, I was ready to buy a belt. Belts were $30, two belts had original pricing $39.
Good point. Do you think that happens? (Sincere question)
They got them for free though, so any money is profit for funding services
> put that money to good use


Most likely that good use will be to fund the CEO's bonus.
☝️ This

People don't really understand the purpose of OP shops..
Not mine, which just lifted prices across the whole store by about 30% … They had a “sale” to cover it up though, “old tags half price” … I saw ONE old tag after looking for about 45 mins.
They were $200
People are donating items for free to these places. The staff are volunteers. The "charities" make a killing & do nothing for people who are struggling. Also, who are these resellers???
With the bonus of them being wrinkled, needing new soles and having had someone else’s smelly old feet in them.
Not cheap. I paid $400 brand new for my RM Williams on sale and there are sales often. 

You can buy RM factory 2nds for $350-$400 and it's near perfect boots.

Not cheap at all.....
No1 reason why op shops and salvos have jacked up their prices
They wanna live like common people
Definitely not seeing these at the Moe Vinnies.
Rich hipsters tending being poor, buying 400 buck RMs at an op shop. Man, I'm fkn lost, but I know I'm poor.
Honestly I’d much rather salvos sell them for 400 than a reseller pick them up for 20 and take the difference
Exactly. Salvos stores are to make money to spend on their community programs, not to provide affordable items for people in need.

If you are in need of clothing (etc) but can't afford it, I believe that St Vinnies are a good option but you have to actually go in and tell them you need X and Y and have no money.

The other is any OP shops outside major cities frequently do have reasonable prices.

The problem is caused by resellers who would regularly go and buy all the clothes anyone is likely to pay good money for, leaving the shit stuff for those in need.
True. It can take years to properly wear in a pair.
Or maybe there are also people who just want to buy second hand, because it’s better than buying new (for the environment and many other reasons).
Have you seen these people in person, or are they in your head?
What’s he asking for them?
I've seen brand new ones for 400 at dfo, think they were clearance or factory seconds
You can go DFO for around this price, give or take a few $$$.
Paid shy of $500 for a brand new on display RM with a minor scuff that’ll buff out. No way I’m going to pay $400 for this junk.
Gotta be careful.as fuck with modern rm williams though they fall apart if you buy the wrong ones.
When I was about 14 I read humans sweat about a cup sweat a day through their feet. This fact has haunted me for the rest of my life
Not just smelly or dirty. But also shoes get moulded by the wearers feet a bit. I’d never buy second hand shoes.
New ones are $650. I know, I just bought a pair.
What happens is they have someone who prices all donations that are made.  This guy just priced them at $629 and thought "Oh well might as well make them $400" without any further thought
Rrp might be $629 but you can pick them up for between $400-$500 pretty regularly
I bet id get them less then half that on FB marketplace in a week of looking.
$100 - cost to manufacture

$300 - marketing

$200 - profit
I scratched the RM’s my Dad bought me for my 16th straight across the toe about 2 weeks after receiving them. It did not buff out. It was devastating. It was a *really big deal* to get such a gift.
Lots of items in factory outlets are specifically manufactured to sell at factory outlets
Mongrels are pretty decent too, and its honestly hard to go wrong with workboot brands.

Apart from that rough patch Blundstone went through when they moved their production to China and apparently moved their quality control to fucking Narnia or something. Got a pair of Blundstones a little while after the move and the soles just straight-up disintegrated in about six months.
10 years?!? Mine lasted a year and a half when I was wearing them every day (manual labour). Still the best boots I've ever had, so comfy. I've had Rossi and Steel Blue, both lasted the same as the Redbacks, but not as cushioned in the sole.
Also Aus owned and made. Love my Redbacks,  the grippy soles are so good
Protip: if the soles come off, which has been happening with Solovairs, a local cobbler with a Doc Marten specialisation can get them lasting forever.
Doc Martins are pieces of shite now. Better off with Solovairs
The original reason Op shops (short for opportunity shops) started back in the global economic depression of the 1890s was to provide affordable second hand goods to people who couldn’t afford to buy new
>I never thought that the target was people who were struggling.


Sadly you've bought the narrative the large chains are pushing to ensure their CEOs are able to keep their nests well feathered. This was the target audience up until about 10ish years ago when the process of 'thrift gentrification' began. Its in the name:  opportunity shop- meaning you have the opportunity to purchase things at an affordable rate or the American thrift shop, meaning it is a place for thrifty people to shop.
I’ve heard of people who are struggling being dressed at op shops free of charge however
It absolutely is if you're not gay.
> My understanding of op shops is they are there to raise money that goes to people that are struggling.

Salvos raise money only for themselves.
It didn't used to be. It used to be a way for the poor to shop for themselves while retaining their dignity. A lot of poor people won't ask for help out of shame, so this method of raising money instead of selling things for cheap helps less people.
>I never thought that the target was people who were struggling.

It always was until recently. Then "thrift shopping" came along.
There is a local op shop in my town that is managed by a local church. The church covers the rent for the shop, so the rent is not paid by the sales of donated items. All the donated items are sold at reasonable, affordable prices, and all the proceeds go to the local food bank run by the church. It is the best way for op shops to operate. The food bank consistently has a good supply of high-quality food. When I sought assistance from the food bank, they even provided me with Ben and Jerry’s ice cream! All the people involved are volunteers and they are truly kind-hearted, so yeh support smaller thrift shops because they are better💕
It never used to be. And I know other smaller charities help out as I’ve seen them help people in need choose the clothes and shoes for them, not and try a make it into a retail store. Salvos are the worse in pushing they are retail.

As per someone else’s comment ..so true. https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/s/qNXfOH7qEQ
Oh totally. That’s why it’s great haha 
They moved the rm store to the south wharf DFO but yeah, got two pairs there for $350 each, new.
Fact
>They then started to reposition as a luxury fashion brand.

They were bought by Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessy, aka [LMVH](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/LVMH) then sold to Andrew 'Twiggy' Forrest.

Can't really get more luxury brand than that...
They are worth it though. I wear mine almost daily and walk yons in them and they hold up well for years.
Less than that.  2-3 years ago they were offering them for $400 through their website, if you'd wait a while for them to be made rather than from existing stock.  Seeing the local cowboy cosplay store was offering a limited selection for about $670 I thought it was a decent deal.
They're very popular with all doctors - the male junior doctor uniform is a button up shirt, chinos, and a pair of RMs.
I usually see these giant RM Willians stickers on the back of bogan utes, which is why I associate wanna be cobwoys with them.

For work I thought they usually wear Mongrel Boots which don't always have steel caps in them. That being said, I love good steel capped boots. I currently use a pair of Steel Blue's on my motorcycle trip as they 

* work better for protection than cheap Motorcycle boots
* can be walked in daily
* don't cook my feet on hot, dry days
   * unlike waterproof adv boots
* offer some level of rain protection
* are good hiking boots
Myrtleford op-shop in North East Victoria is still priced the way op-shops should be. 


About a year ago I got a shopping bag full of clothes. Jeans, two shirts, a dress and a skirt) for $5. 


Five. Fucking. Dollars. 


They still have insanely good prices and I've heard the owner say that they never price anything over $20. 


They're independent and support various causes, I think the latest one I heard was the local cancer ward) 
I’m also an avid op shopper, and I keep seeing empty Voss water bottles in the glass section. They’re usually $4-$5, more than a full bottle of Voss from the supermarket. I always take those to the checkout to ask wtf.
Have you been recently? Quite the opposite but much better quality at Vinnies
Maybe true, but the variety at vinnies is just not even close. You're usually lucky to find more than two racks of men's clothes, and what they do have are usually suits and slacks
concrete cowboy
This should be the top comment
Mint! I'm stoked for ya :) 
People like to shit on OP shops these days but theyre seriously worth a look no matter what if you're nearby and have the time. You won't always find something but they're called OP shops for a reason.
You’re overpopulated
Nah, capitalism.
Not sure why your being down voted. We have too many people and not enough houses/resources right now. Overpopulation might not be the best suited word to use but it’s still accurate. 

Downvote away ;)
Really depends how much you want to spend.
https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/s/qNXfOH7qEQ
So is charging $400 for used shoes
Wild
Do I think what happens?
Exactly
No...

https://www.afr.com/wealth/people/meet-the-head-of-a-1b-business-who-earns-less-than-450-a-week-20230105-p5cam8
No. They (salvos, st vinnies etc) perform a FUCK ton of social services (food banks, DV interventions, mental health stuff, housing). 
Yes, they need to pay the CEO. No, the CEO doesn’t get an exorbitant salary compared to market, and could earn a lot more working in private companies etc, instead of NFPs.
Women who go to op shops to try and find anything halfway decent, haggle with the poor volunteers to get the price down as far as it can go and then resell the items for a profit. Usually clothes that wind up on poshmark, depop or even just eBay or marketplace. Books also do well. Any clothes or accessories at affordable prices largely aren’t being sold to people struggling anymore, it’s all to fund someone’s side hustle. Add to that as you said that the charities themselves aren’t even supporting people struggling anymore and suddenly it’s not even really charity.
Gives them character
That and resellers :(
Also because they think they have become smart using google, to check prices out.

 They just amp up prices by looking at rip off places like ebay and other price monitoring web sites. It serves nobodies interesting behaving like Antique Roadshow gold-diggers.  " if you want it we will rip you off"

You walk into Opshop and their prices on books are double and triple the marked new published price. Even recent crap.

Just like everything else in Australia the sellers are brain dead and stupid expecting the prices that they are asking for.  Even  things one year old they want the new price and sometimes more. Like every piece of crap thats a few months old gets inflated.  

 The whole secondhand market place is really a place for the truly stupid.
I’d say it’s mostly resellers on depop etc and ‘thrifting’ being a cool think on tiktoks lol
William Shatner's cover version 🤌
https://youtu.be/lkpLbEM06qE?si=bHsUflFJ2y3HgXqx
Moe? Hello fellow local
Who walks down the street and thinks " His got the RM Williams"

 Every time that I see  someone wearing RM Williams boots is when they are poorly dressed, have no fashion sense, colors clashing and they stand out like dogs balls like odd fellas.  

It seems to be a niche person with niche mentality that wears RM Williams boots. I rarely see a genuine farmer wearing RM Williams boots these days. I think its mainly standard Young Liberal meeting workwear or politicians casual day dress code shoes.
Will they sell though? Surely there's a more reasonable figure between 20 and 400 bucks 
Yeah. Homeless people don't exist, duhh.
I got factory seconds jeans at R.M Williams DFO for $40 about 10~ years ago. Had a few stitching imperfection and minor rips. Still have them. 
I got a pair of RMs at DFO for like $230
Yeah but at least your $400 would go to helping someone less fortunate by buying this pair
Just another brand relying on the public not knowing that “genuine leather” means it’s just about the shittiest leather you can buy.
Is it a fact though? I cant seem to find any primary sources (I can find ai claiming sources but when I look at them they are either not primary sources or they are estimating the maximum a foot can sweat not what's normal) a cup a day seems possible but it seems excessive under normal conditions. My socks don't normally get soaking wet every couple of hours.
They probably check ebay.
Out of curiosity, what gives you that impression? When I worked at an outlet store, we just received clothing that wasn't in season.


When I talked to the RM Williams staff at the outlet store the other month, they said the items either had very minor damage or was seasonal stock that didn't tell at full price so was moved to the outlet store to create floor space for new season stock.
Year and a half is amazing for a tradie. My partner is a gardener and fully stomps through dirt, mud, and water daily and his Redbacks last a year+
Redbacks still made here?
This 👆over and over. So poor people had the dignity of dressing well without begging and by choice.  Lower income people could also have the dignity of participating in the market economy rather than being infantilised by the charity of others.
Yeah right, I'm not surprised to hear that sadly. I haven't looked favourably on op shops (specially the larger chains) since I heard about some issues with employing adults with disabilities and not paying much. Not sure if that's still an issue or even if I misunderstood it at the time but it left a bad impression regardless.
The reality is they exist to make money. The 'thrift' and the 'op' are just marketing.
It’s also simply because the op shop business model doesn’t work today because of online shopping and Kmart. 

You can get pretty good quality goods and apparel, all new, for very cheap. The “opportunity” is not longer only provided at op shops. 

Op shops technically should just shut shop because there’s no need for their services. Their mission was accomplished by other market forces. But as you said, no org would shut shop without a fight, so instead of competing for even lower some genius had the idea of marking up prices 10 fold. For literal trash.
It depends on the shop location, even more than it does the charity. Some have that ability, some don't, and some just have a "as long as you aren't really obvious about it, we actually don't give a shit if you steal" policy that they don't talk about.
They were never for those living in significant poverty/ the destitute. They were traditionally serving the segment of the population who were able to make the ends meet,  but with limited disposable income - students, families, the elderly etc.
> They were bought by Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessy, aka LMVH then sold to Andrew 'Twiggy' Forrest.

Twiggy did the same to Akubra. Used to be able to get them for around $180-$240. The same hat is now $290-$350. Cull the reseller network, raise the prices, and kill competition to promote exclusiveness.


And anything LVMH touches goes to shit. It is one reason why I will never ever buy another Rimowa aluminium bag. Used to travel almost exclusively with Rimowa bags, not anymore.


They used to be the ducks nuts of quality, and style. Now they are just overpriced style with no substance.
I pay 200 for my work boots and beat them to hell and back on a farm for 2 years minimum before I need to replace them. You want to tell me they will last between 6 and 12 years to justify paying 3 to 6 times as much for R.M Williams? Not a chance.
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-12/salvation-army-failed-to-protect-children-royal-commission-finds/7835784
Thanks! Used, lovingly I'm sure, cos they're in near-perfect condition
No you are
Overpopulation isn't why salvos is charging $400 for a pair of second hand shoes. It's more likely that the staff / volunteers are out of touch
Its reddit. Of course. Good on you mate 👍
Happy to pay the same as for a pair of RM's if needed. I'm sick of paying $200 for a pair of boots and they fall apart inside 6 months from daily wear, and that's office use only.
Oh I agree.
You should contact them and tell em to take it down since it's without your permission lol
Do you think the funds go where theyre supposed to
I personally know Miriam. She is a truly selfless person (I’m not part of the Salvos but very familiar with them).
Salvos specifically has an awful past.

I don't care how much good they do if one of their former leaders felt safe enough to say he thinks all gay people should be dead:

https://theweek.com/articles/474344/gays-should-die-timeline-salvation-armys-antigay-flareups

Or to cover up child sex abuse:

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-12/salvation-army-failed-to-protect-children-royal-commission-finds/7835784

Or villainaise sex worker while profiting from their depictions:

https://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/salvation-army-pulls-donation-campaign-over-depiction-of-sex-workers/msq4tznvx

Maybe they've not actively evil right at this moment but I wouldn't give them the benefit of the doubt.
Good luck to them, if it could be sold easily it wouldn't be donated
Oh not this argument again. Someone else making money reselling a thing they buy off you, doesn't mean you HAVE to start selling it to them for more.
Nothing worst than stupid people selling stuff that they don't even know what it is that they are selling.

Its also Auction companies who think that they can ex company or government surplus and turn it into gold bars. Everyone who handles complete shit seems to want to mark it up 100%. 

Then if you dare ask "have you tested it and is it verified to work? Nah we know nothing about this item or how it works"

 The joke with these sellers is they will claim " untested, do not know how it works" then you will find they running another ad for a working item of the same model " fully tested and working" But they did not know how to test the faulty piece of crap that they want you to pay almost full price for. 

Even dead stuff they will describe as  "dead not working" but they expecting 5 bucks less than a working model. The greed and stupidity is unbelievable.
Well the difference is ebay you are sourcing and advertising the stuff at a cost.




Here they got donated it and one would hope the priority is to sell it to free up room for more stock. Apparently there are enough hipsters paying to look poor for this to sell which to be fair if that's the case good on em


Amusing that they ocassionally go on sale new for around the same price
..is the only genuine version.
Hello
I wouldn't say RM Williams is niche, most of my mates would have a least one pair. Good everyday boot for work, going out on the weekend, going to the shops etc, and they last ages.
Great boots and manufactured in Australia, so their appeal is pretty logical once some thought is put into it and you have actually experienced them.

Broad appeal to both professional workers and more outdoor people requiring hardy long lasting shoes.

It’s easy to take the cynical route full of derision, and we all have our bias against certain things, but it does reflect really poorly if it permeates your whole life.
Most pairs of RM Williams cost [$649 new](https://www.rmwilliams.com.au/footwear/men/chelsea-boots?lang=en_AU). Why pay $400 for a worn pair?
Why would anyone want to buy a smelly sweated out smelly footwear. The yuck factor is up there akin to buying a secondhand dildo its just so appalling to me. 

There is no shoe brand  in the world that I desire that I would buy secondhand, especially at that kind of stupid price. 

I used to work in the bank and I used to like wearing  Church Brogues. When I bought them back then they were a 300 to 500 dollar pairs of shoes. Now the prices are crazy and even if I had the money I would not buy them today. 

I still have several old pairs maybe I should try and sell them, I might get my original purchase price back. Now I consider them uncomfortable shoes  that's like putting a vice around your feet. They only worn for special Birthdays, weddings and funerals dressing occasions !  

These are grandad technology shoes  that are not fit for purpose akin to useless Rolex watches that cant even keep time properly, nostalgic crap. The only thing I still like is the old quality business shirts, tweed jackets  and other high quality European or English clothing that just lasts. Real natural fibres properly made.  I always look in op shops for old English Tweed wool jackets they tough as nails and very warm.
Eventually maybe, there's no time frame on this. Just needs to sell before the end of time like 99% of the other shit in Salvos. If nothing else, inflation will make this a steal in a few decades.
The last 3 pairs of jeans I bought second hand were RM Williams, I got them off Marketplace for $30.  I did have to get them taken up but even with that additional expense they were a bargain.
No shit, that's a good deal
You mean 90% eaten up by admin?
Unfortunately soooooo much of the info on the net in my industry is deceptive and lacking nuance:

People and articles repeat that leather comes in these specific grades: genuine, top grain and full grain.

But it’s simply not true terms are inclusive...all leather is genuine, everything that’s not suede is top grain and full grain is unsanded top grain.

It’s simply a matter of narrower and more specific  terms.  When a product gets “fancy” you will tend to find it more thoroughly described… but it doesn’t mean that the broader terms that could be used don’t still apply:  

For example, if you find a package of something labeled “meat“, you can assume probably correctly that it’s not quality.  Whereas if you buy an A5 cut of Wagyu beef, you’re going to see it described in detail… but to a person keeping a vegan diet it is still 100% accurate to say that the Wagyu is “meat.”  
In the same way, beautiful full grain leather from a top tier tannery is still “genuine leather”, even though generally, you’ll see it described and more detail.


It annoys me immensely that all the articles call these terms “grades” because most people think of ***grading as taking objective measures that would be the same regardless of the source:*** The purity of metals, amount of marbling in beef, octane in gas, etc...but leather quality and price is going to vary by tannery more than these factors and there are thousands of tanneries all over the world. Those terms talk about what is or isn’t done to a leather’s surface mechanically (splitting and sanding), nothing more.

If you’re saying “genuine” specifically means a bad low quality leather then I’m sure you’ve seen the other side of that coin: “full grain is the absolute best/the highest grade”

Both of those things are 100% false. Cheap crappy full grain exists...and there are products stamped “genuine leather” made with high quality full grain.

**Exhibit A**: SB Foot Tannery is the largest by volume tannery in the USA they are full owned by Red Wing Boots and they use “Genuine leather” to refer generally to all their leather, even those that are explicitly full grain like Featherstone: [https://imgur.com/a/Tdtbjge](https://imgur.com/a/Tdtbjge)

**Exhibit B**: Horween tannery in Chicago is probably the most “famous” tannery in the world...just search “Horween” on  or . This is Horween’s explanation: [https://www.thetanneryrow.com/leather101/understanding-leather-grains](https://www.thetanneryrow.com/leather101/understanding-leather-grains)

Leather quality is much more nuanced than terms like genuine, top grain and full grain can tell you... there are hundreds of other factors that go into tanning “good leather”...it’s a bit like judging some that has many components, like a computer, by one factor and nothing else. What would would happen if you just maxed out one component and left the rest at the lowest level? Ram, hard drive space, the CPU, the GPU, monitor, type of hard drive and dozens of other things come together to make a good machine...the same is true with good leather.

You can view the Full Grain>Top Grain>Genuine hierarchy as a “quick and dirty” way to pick quality if you’re in a hurry and not spending a lot of cash on a leather item.

However, those terms do have actual meanings that don’t always equate to good quality:

**Full Grain** is a leather that has only had the hair removed and hasn’t been sanded (corrected).

**Top Grain** is actually a term that includes full grain: It’s everything that’s not suede a split, this means that full grain is a type of top grain. When you see “top grain” in a product description chances are it’s a leather that’s been corrected (sanded). Nubuck is an example of a sanded leather (often used on the interior of watch straps and construction boots because it’s more resilient to scratches), but so is a much beloved leather: Horween’s Chromexcel (it’s lightly corrected). The amount of correction can vary widely but once the sander hits it, it’s no longer full grain.

**Genuine Leather** is, admittedly a term found on lots of low quality leather. That’s because the bar for “genuine” is extremely low: It just means real. To a tannery it’s all genuine. When you read the description for “genuine” that many online articles give, they’re actually describing a leather called a “finished split”, which is a usually cheap quality suede that’s been painted or coated to look like smooth leather.

Put simply:

Genuine=Not fake

Top Grain=Not suede

Full Grain=Not sanded

Anything beyond that is an assumption.

The gold standard for getting good leather is tannery and tannage...everything else is easily exploited by meeting the minimum definition of each.
Yeah they’re not using the “genuine leather” you’re referring to though. I’ve bought their leftover leather hides before and there was some good quality stuff from world renowned tanneries in there. Talking wickett and Craig, Tasman leather for example. Most likely would be using full/top grain leather.
Yeh, I don’t think you know what you’re talking about.
https://www.onyamagazine.com/australian-affairs/innovation/is-designer-outlet-clothing-worth-buying/#:~:text=Today%2C%20over%2080%25%20of%20the,cheaper%20ways%20to%20manufacture%20them.

“Damaged items no longer account for the majority of modern-day outlet stores. Today, over 80% of the stock is specifically made for the outlet. This means you’re more likely to find clothing items that only resemble their full-priced counterparts. 

Since most brands are producing items specifically for their less expensive outlets, they’re also finding cheaper ways to manufacture them. This can mean skimping on a few details or using another material.”
Yeah I had a habit of bouncing spades off the steel toes for fun. Oddly enough, that wasn't the first part to give out.
Yep 👍
Yeah Good Sammy’s is 100% for-profit and use people with disabilities to keep their costs down. They treat their staff and volunteers like shit most the time too.

I think Vinnies stores let people use vouchers from the charity side but that might be an urban legend like most “charity” in Australia.
Actually they weren’t - theres a great book by Robyn Annear called Nothing New where she researches the history of op shopping and second hand fashion in Australia, and they started as charity fundraisers. Was always about making money using free donations. 
They’re positioned as a dress boot now days. I pay ~$200 for work boots annually. I’ve got a set of RM’s I can wear with a suit that’ll last me decades. Still wouldn’t pay $500 for them though.
I’ve had so many brands of work boots it’s not funny, slip on and lace up.
I own a pair of RM Williams boots and I can say there is not a single boot that fits as well, is as comfortable or durable as the RMs.
Australian made, hand made and very well made, if you have the money or as a dress boot 100% worth it.
Yes but can you wear those boots to an office? They are different products and most office shoes do not last as well.
U
Haha yep 👍🏼 I hope young Australians wake up to what’s happening. We’re keeping the economy pumped up with ever increasing levels of immigration. It’s a Ponzi scheme.
Wootten are amazing and are handmade in Victoria. The Chelsea boots are slightly more expensive than RM's but better in every way. You could also look for some Crockett & Jones boots on sale. If you want a different style you could look at some of the Red Wing Heritage boots, White's or Viberg. Also check out [https://www.reddit.com/r/goodyearwelt/](https://www.reddit.com/r/goodyearwelt/) for more suggestions. Availability might be a problem in Australia for some brands.

[https://wootten.com.au/shop/#.product-category-boots](https://wootten.com.au/shop/#.product-category-boots)
I'm an employee at a Salvos.  I can guarantee that the money goes towards local welfare centres. Not 100%, as they need to pay the rent and keep employees payed,  but I've seen it first hand, it's still a charity.
Yes, all terrible stuff, but you’re very grateful they exist when they deliver food to your mum so you can eat 👍🏻
i know someone who is out of the closet but relied on salvo's as a kid. mixed emotions for sure
capitalism disagrees with you.
how the hell do you make money from reselling normal used clothing? (not vintage)
Yep, you can effectively price out resellers with far more modest price increases. $400 rm boots is something else entirely
But op shops HAVE realised they can
That’s not how the system works man…
I don’t think you meant to respond to me?
$4 shirt from kmart in a vinnies? $10
I saw one of those InstaMax cameras being sold at salvos for like $45. No charger, no box, no film, no way to prove that it works… I think I’ll pay the extra 25 for a new one that includes all those things plus a warranty. 

I know a lot of it comes from the top, but some of the salvos workers must be stupid to think they can get away with these prices but will still gift their grandkids $5 at Christmas lol
Down vote for that? Harsh crowd this morning.
They think they look cooler and more authentic in a used pair.
• Wearing them in is a hard time

• you’re still saving money
Why did I read all that lol
I was amazed at the time. This wasn't that long ago either, I got them in 2023.
Don't forget the executives!! Once everyone gets a piece at salvos the remaining cents go to the less fortunate.
I found this very interesting, thank you.
No part of me really cared about leather grains but I found myself reading this whole thing because it was written in such an informative and easy to understand way. Cheers
Yeah go tell yourself that lol, genuine leather is the shit that’s left over after all the good parts of the leather have been removed.

Bonded leather is even worse, that’s all the dust that’s glued together just so it can be called leather and sold.
Because you're clearly incapable of looking it up yourself; the scale from best to worst is: full-grain, top-grain, split-grain, genuine, bonded.
Good Sammy is a registered charity for training and employment of people with disabilities. So not 100% profit.

No comment on if they treat people like shit or not :P
I don't know why you were downvoted for saying something and referencing an actual source?
Yeah, nah.

>Robyn Annear, an author and op-shopper, says the shops gave "some agency to the people who did need inexpensive clothing and other things".

>"Charity and thrift shops, and jumble sales before them, elevated the poor to consumers rather than supplicants," she tells RN's Life Matters.




https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-01-12/history-of-thrifting-how-op-shops-shed-their-stigma/11785608
I had a pair custom made (long story) in 2012, I wear them for work so not heavily used but 2-3 days a week. They are still going strong after having them resoled at the ten year mark. I will get at least another 5 years out of them minimum. Worth every penny and as long as the quality doesn’t go down I’d happily get another pair.
Firstly, I don't go to an office. Secondly, the boots pictured are not "wear to the office" boots. And thirdly, I wear whatever I damn well please regardless of whether I'm going, because I don't have to try to impress people. 

 Regardless, I'd never pay $600 for a pair of boots.
I am rubber and you are glue and whatever you say bounces off me and sticks to you
Until they denied me any help cause I turned up with my same sex partner to collect the food vouchers I was promised over the phone.  Suddenly they had run out and wouldn't have any for the rest of the week.  This was almost 30 yrs ago but it still meant that we ate boiled weevil rice for a week as that was all that was in the house.
[deleted]
Charities aren’t supposed to follow capitalist market logic, but yes in this case it’s exactly what Salvos is doing.
So do all wholesalers put their price up to resale, because someone else is selling it for more? No. Capitalism disagrees with you.
Without it being a creepy pervert customer base, you mean?

There used to be a guy who'd sell regular rugby shorts on ebay.  In every single shot you can see he's sporting a huge erection.  Eventually he was banned. I swear it wasn't me.  I did check out his seller page from time to time though, and he's not the only one at it.
I always assumed they somehow get not first dibs, but maybe "first notification" or access to some registry of recently deceased estates?

That they then reach out to and say "well take care if cleaning and disposing of stuff. Just give us everything free."

Can always make money if your product costs just collection time.

But then again, I've learnt so much about charities in this post lol. So I really got no fukn idea.


And I'm also high
Well they can. But their customers don't seem happy about it.
Okay, so wholesalers and resellers aren't a thing? Everyone just sells at the highest price possible?
Yes I did. Resellers are not the reason oppy's charge more. Oppy's seeing they could get more money for stuff and being greedy is why they charge more.
I mean they only do it because people pay it. I work at a servo and we sell most shit at a big mark-up. If someone complains my go to is “yeah well aslong as people keep buying it they’ll get away with it, personally I don’t buy X here”
they shat on Shatner!
Which DFO is this?? I specifically went to the one in Homebush early last year hoping to go and have a look at their RM Williams and the outlet had shut down, didn't think there were any left anymore...
Glad to share!
Thank you!  That means a lot!
Yes you are correct on what genuine leather is but RM Williams does not use 'genuine leather'. 

They use a variety of leathers including Kangaroo, veal calf leather, nutbuck, yearling, Ostrich etc etc.  The sky is the limit, that's why the boots cost $500+. Now it's debatable if they are worth the price but this isn't redback or blundstone...
Williams is using none of that though...
Okay champ. lol
What do you consider a good boot? Please name a few brands.
They don’t *spend* anything to do that and they pay the disabled staff a pittance
Mate, have you read the book or did you just find one interview with her to support your point of view? It’s why op shops started. It doesn’t mean it also doesn’t benefit the buyers who needed to access the goods. 
You’ve clearly not been in an office for at least a decade if you don’t think RMs are office boots. Every white collar bloke in their 20s has a pair of them based on my experience.
I do go to an office though and you were replying to me so get over yourself.
Sounds like you’re trying to impress people in this crappy post of yours though?
I learnt that in primary school

 as a retort to fools
Well that’s a stupid and very binary way to think about things. 

You do realise good and bad things can exist simultaneously, yeah?
And Lifeline and Vinnies
Or you could posit they are responding to a demand, in order to obtain more money to support their causes.
If you are poor they give you vouchers to cover it
often they do yes:

"A Veblen good is a type of luxury good, named after American economist Thorstein Veblen, for which the demand increases as the price increases, in apparent contradiction of the law of demand, resulting in an upward-sloping demand curve. The higher prices of Veblen goods may make them desirable as a status symbol in the practices of conspicuous consumption and conspicuous leisure. "


but if someone is able to sell it for more than you, logically you may as well just sell it for more yourself and cut out the reseller. The only way a reseller earns their cut is by having access to markets that the wholesaler does not.
They’re both retailers, though. 

Salvos used to be cheap, because,
In part, the people shopping there needed cheap things. Now the people buying there are mostly resellers, and the cheap things aren’t available for the people that need them anymore. So they have changed their business model, now they are focussing on making more profit from selling things so they can help people who need it in other ways.
Just drives retail higher and higher - that’s how the system was designed, there is no top end of the scale, if they see someone is willing to pay 10x retail - then the item is desirable pushing retail further and further up. Dick heads “getting a bag” just fucks things for the average Joe.
Okay? I think both things contribute to cost
Most don’t really buy shit like that though, and when shit doesn’t get sold the salvos send it to landfill once they get new donations. 
Also it’s meant to be an “opportunity” shop. Where us poors get to taste some second hand good life, they aren’t meant to be operating on the same profit based logic that servos do. 
Salvos and their shitty ethics and history kinda suck.
DFO South Warf in Melbourne has an RM WIlliams
My comment was in regards to genuine leather being sub par, I made no comment about the boots. In any case, footwear has a variety of purposes, so a good boot for what? Office worker, wanna be cowboy, farm hand, general gardening....
Well white rabbits. Check mate and game over.
Part of the reason they exist is so people who can’t afford nice clothes can still have the opportunity to source them from somewhere. They are referred to as opportunity shops, or Op Shops. That literally is/was part of their cause.
I think that's apples and oranges though. This isn't a luxury product.

This is a product donated and haphazardly chucked on a shelf with a price tag, being sold at the same price as something a person spent hours looking in op shops for, cleaning and repairing, taking photos, typing descriptions, listing it online, fielding buyer enquiries, then posting it.

Oppy's are greedy. That's why stuff costs more now.
Like fighting against gay rights.
But it sucks for the poor people who need clothes. I guess they can go to KMart and get a better deal or go dumpster diving. There seems to be more poor people around these days.
Yes but the item available online from a reseller is desirable because someone spent the time finding it, cleaning it, repairing it, taking photos, typing a description, answering your questions, packaging it up, and posting it to your door. All this for an item that you never would have found in the op shop because you have a job and can't be there the second they put new donations on the shelf.

The item in the op shop is just a dirty old pair of shoes someone put a tag on and threw on a shelf.

The value is not the same. And the op shops are dickheads for thinking it is.
Yeah fair point, I don’t know much about it but the main goal is kind of profit though right? They put the profits towards charity? Or they’re meant to anyway?
$6 for a saucer at Vinnie's, go to Big W
Fuck. Was in Melbourne a few months ago and don't have any plans to be back there any time soon.
Looser couldn’t even rhyme
His brain is stuck in time
I had a lady working at an op shop try explain they are not there to give people cheap clothes who couldn’t otherwise afford them. They are trying to collect as much money to fund their programs to then help the less fortunate. She said if you can’t afford the clothes and need them, come tell us and we will give you clothes for free (I doubt they would give you the expensive ones tho). Still ridiculous some of the prices I have seen, some of the workers think they are working at a boutique shop and take it very personally for some reason as if they own the store.
A common belief, but a false one. They exist to raise money for charity, which they do by selling things
alternatively Op shops are a quality filter, so the shit products that fall apart in 6 months, dethread, stretch or tear never make it to opshops. thus what you find there second hand is often better quality than what is at kmart.
These are R.M Williams shoes I would consider them luxury
Yeah, that’s why I personally don’t donate or shop there. But Vinnies definitely helped my family when I was a kid.
Oh yeah, that was also kinda my point - resellers make it more expensive for everyone else shopping there. But they also will buy the stuff cheap, so it’s not there for the people that need it anyway.
Yawn, it’s a moot point, this is not how economics work. If it’s proven to sell at x amount, prices come up. Simple.
People over paying for throw-back clothing is beyond me. Also, if re-sellers just left items there, the choice of quality pieces in each op-shop would be greater for the people that need them..
I was just having fun and thought you were to, some light hearted humour. But I guess you are a cockhead so 👎
