Hey guys, i recently purchased a Haier washer & dryer combo and i am having some major regrets with this machine. I have had it for approximately 8 weeks now and every single time i do a load of washing, it estimates it’s going to take anywhere between 3 to 4 and a half hours JUST to wash my clothes, and then i still have to dry them

I always opt for the express 15 minute wash cycle due to this, and instead, i dedicate 3 and a half hours just to dry my clothes, and even after that amount of time my clothes still come out damp.

I am honestly very frustrated and disappointed with this machine. How long does a typical wash & dry cycle take for you, and does anyone here have any recommendations on a better alternative to the machine I currently have? I only do my own washing & drying in this machine
> i dedicate 3 and a half hours just to dry my clothes, and even after that amount of time my clothes still come out damp.


Washer/Dryers only usually dry like 4-5kg of clothes per load which isn't a lot, if they are coming out damp it sounds like the load might be too big.


I've never liked washer dryers as they can't dry the whole wash load and you have to split it up.
Ah washer dryer combos.  The monorail of the clothes washing industry.  Get a separate washer and dryer and try to fob off your combo on some unsuspecting fool.
You should be able to see basic info on the Choice site - more in-depth info requires a membership/subscription - or a friend with one ($29.95 for three months - can cancel renewals straight away)

https://www.choice.com.au/home-and-living/laundry-and-cleaning/washing-machines/review-and-compare/washer-dryer-combos
You’re likely exceeding the wash loaf limit.

Halve your load. Also halve your washing powder/liquid. See if that makes a difference.

We’re quite happy with our Haier once we realised we were overfilling it and adjusted accordingly. The refresh function for single garments is AMAZING.
I have an LG combo which has been going strong now since 2011. I feel like I’ve definitely got my moneys worth. 

Wash cycle only = 1 - 1.5 hours, or there is a 30 minute quick wash cycle. 

Wash dry cycle 3- 6 hours. We usually only use it for towels and sheets and leave it to run whilst we’re asleep.
My washing machine died this year so I went out and bought the same brand (bosch) to fit the space. 

It’s the WORST. 

It has a cycle that says 46 minutes on the display but takes and hour and 25 minutes. It’s so infuriating.
I got an Electrolux washing machine and it’s been perfect the last 3 years with the 15 mins quick wash option that actually cleans my clothes properly. As for a dryer I still have a Simpson brand that’s been going strong almost 10 years now. I’ll admit they’re not exactly energy efficient but I only use the dryer 2-3 times a week for 30 min cycles each time so it’s not too bad for me honestly.
Fundamentally, a certain sized cylinder can wash twice as much clothing as it can tumble dry.  All combo machines suffer from this issue.  Either wash half loads so the dryer can work properly or find a way to pull out half the washing before the drying cycle begins.
The drying function is obviously not working, see if it is even blowing out hot air.
Try a dedicated heat pump dryer and you will never look back. The clothes come out dry and not shrinked, and no steam in the laundry.
I tried a LG model over 10 years ago. It was crap. My current LG washing machine only has insane cycle times. If I use delicates, it doesn't rinse all the water out.

My sister loves her Fischer Paykel machine
I have a washer/dryer combo. Not sure of the brand (something shit as it came with the apartment.
The wash cycle doesn’t clean. The dryer cycle ruins your clothes and still doesn’t dry them.
I spend $40 I can’t afford at the laundromat now. 

The best combo is a separate washer and dryer.
I have limited space and can’t have both a washer and dryer.  I’ve had a Samsung previously that performed about as well as your Haier.  I switched to a Bosch recently, and it is infinitely superior.  A typical wash/dry cycle for a medium load (around 4kg) is about 2.5 hours.  A wash only up to 10kg is 48 minutes.  It can do a small load wash/dry in under an hour (but these come out slightly damp).



tl;dr: I recommend a Bosch.
Washer dryers are notorious for not working properly or failing. Mixing water and electric drying is asking for trouble.  
  
Front load washers take longer than top loaders. Top loaders have more water and more water in contact with the clothes than front loaders. Because of this front loaders are twice as fast.
Yeah,  this is correct. I had one for a while year ago and got rid of it pretty quickly because it just isn’t very good at drying. I’ve got a Bosch front loader (4 years old, replaced the original one due to a failed drum suspension) and an older Bosch condenser dryer which is still going strong over fifteen years later.

The condenser/heat pump dryers are more expensive at first but they work so much better and are cheaper to run

Edit: realised I didn’t answer your question, a full 8kg load of normal washing takes less than a hour in mine (between 45mins and 55mins depending on the cycle I choose), comes out pretty well spun because I’ve got the 1400rpm spin speed model. Also it’s got the forgotten sock feature so you can add items in the first few minutes of the cycle easily. Drying takes around an hour if I use the regular setting but it comes out feeling slightly damp, I just air it for 5 mins on the airer in front of the fire before folding and putting away. I could use the extra dry setting but I think it damages your clothes when they get so hot so I’m more than happy with the extra step. Towels take longer than clothes, but I just do them on extra dry and don’t have to air them.
Some libraries have access. Just call your local and ask for free access
what does the refresh function do exactly? i will try halving the load and halving the washing liquid as well, but this isn’t the best solution because even if this halves the time it takes in the wash/dry cycle i’m only getting thru half as much laundry, so overall it will still take about as much time. it will just be more manageable by halving the time spent tho so i do like this suggestion still

keen to learn about the refresh function
I now have an LG heat pump dryer, works well and with sensor dry it doesn't take too long if I haven't fully loaded it.
Refresh is an 18 minute no detergent cycle that steams 1-2 items up to 1kg, removes bacteria, mild smells and wrinkles, but keeps the clothes dry.
