Hey folks, 

So I'm a grown man impossibly scared of blood tests - I just cannot get them done, and I really mean that its impossible. Something about needles, veins, blood, etc makes me run away, and before you give me ideas on distracting myself, lie down, numbing agents, etc it does not work, as its all in my head and a severe mental block. Been trying for 15 years. Its not the pain or anything as I keep getting injured at sports and doesn't bother me. 

Anyway, I think I need to check myself out as I don't know what I'm deficient in. Are there any alternatives in Australia (I'm in NSW)? Maybe a different kind of blood test that doesnt need veins punctured. Can we have the test while knocked out or unconscious (GP said its not possible)? Can we get some stuff checked via urine, saliva, etc? 

Anyway, keen to hear if anyone can share any ideas of alternatives (although unlikely that anyone would be in the same mindset as me). Almost nil chance of me willingly getting it done. 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Have you seen a psychologist for this?
There are only a very small number of pathology tests that can be done without drawing blood. Anesthesia is unrealistic for a minor procedure like this. Not much you can do but work on your needle phobia I'm afraid.
I very much understand and sympathise. I have this same condition. I saw a psychologist who does exposure therapy. It started very minimal, just looking at pictures. Later I watched videos of blood tests, practised sitting in doctor’s waiting rooms and breathing, eventually even sat in with someone else having a blood test. Having avoided all needles since I was a child, this made it possible for me to have the covid vaccine (twice) and one blood test, back in 2020. The blood test was harder and I did take valium and use numbing cream, and I still panicked and cried. But I did it and i know that if I have to again, I can build myself up to it. 
Edit to add - I suggest finding a GP who is really good with anxiety and can take things from there (at your pace). 
I think the first step is to be honest mate. You haven't really been "trying" for 15 years. You're still at the stage where you can't do it. You're even asking about alternatives. That's not trying, that's avoidance. I'm not knocking you, trust me, I'm the king of avoidance. Just pointing out the behaviour as it's very clear to me due to experience. 

So yeah, first things first is actually taking the first step. Talk to your GP. You're not the first person they've treated with this phobia and you'd expect they'll have some suggestions for you. You just have to make it very clear how bad your phobia is and that it's getting in the way of your medical care. Remember that it's nothing to be ashamed of and that a doctor will  (or should) understand how strong phobias can be. Perhaps you can even talk to the pathology nurse if they have one in the same facility or go to a pathology lab and ask reception. I'm sure they'll be even better versed than the gp. Once you've done that you should hopefully have a plan to treating your phobia. Whether that's exposure, professional therapy or what idk. But I expect the only way forward for this is going to be to reduce the phobia enough to be able to tough it out. 

Best wishes OP. The time to stop avoiding is today! For you. Not for me... I'll start next week.
Bring it up with your GP, I doubt sedation is a particularly viable route however they may be willing to prescribe something to help with the anxiety to help you get through it.
I checked your post history to see if you've talked about anxiety in other areas. If the health problem you mention is still there, no doctor is going to help you with it without a history. Blood tests look for so many important things, everyone should be getting one once a year. 

Here's an at-home CBT [worksheet for needle phobia,](https://www.cci.health.wa.gov.au/~/media/CCI/Mental-Health-Professionals/Anxiety/Anxiety---Information-Sheets/Anxiety-Information-Sheet---14---Overcoming-needle-phobia.pdf) it gives a lot of info on where to start, but you need to see a psychologist. I have dreadful health anxiety stemming from a traumatic diagnosis when I was a teenager, it tossed my life into chaos. Every time I go for a blood test, I'm convinced it will happen again. The medical profession and bad doctors have left me distrustful of every doctor, even talking to doctors I know are good is hard. I still get tests when I need them because avoiding them only makes it worse.
I worked with a guy with a needle phobia to the point he'd scream and cry and he was a police officer for 25 years.  Phobia is a phobia  but for him, they just have him valium to calm him down and he was then on to have tests or his vaccination etc
You said you e been trying for 15 years but haven’t seen a therapist about this?
I'm in the same boat as you are and people just don't understand how difficult it is.

I haven't had a needle for over 45 years and I've been to psychologists and even tried hypothesis but nothing made a difference.

I once had to have a blood test but, no matter how many times I tried I just could not do it.

I'm not afraid of pain and I have tattoos all over me ! I would even let the doctor punch me in the face if that would work in place of an injection 🙃 

Anyway about 5 years ago I once again required a blood test and like before no matter how hard I tried I just could not do it, I even got to the point of showing up at the pathology reception but when the receptionist asked if she could help me, I said Oh sorry I'm in the wrong place 😅 

I was talking to one of my friends about it and he was astounded that this could be possible but didn't say anything,  as it turns out his wife is the head of the pathology and he told her about my problem. 
A few days latter I get a call from her asking about my issues and offered to help me.
She said she could come to my house and would be very careful and caring but would not force me into anything , I agreed but said I can not promise I could go through with it, I ask that when she arrives that she wouldn't show me the equipment or anything. 
She did this and I sat in the lounge chair watching television while she carefully spike to me and said she won't needle me and just wants to check my arm and do some massage ect, I allowed this and didn't even dare look, then she played around a while and then got up and said, Are you ready ! I said yes I will try !
Then she said good because it is done and I took two bottles of blood !
I said WTF ! She had done it and I never felt a single thing !
I could have kissed her because she was amazing!
You are better off talking to the doctor about this and getting referred to talk to someone about it. Because avoiding needles is not a long term solution, the older you get the more you are really going to need blood tests. You need to work out where it is coming from and solve it.

I used to be terrified of Dentist, I mean truly terrified. Until such a point where I had no choice but get root channel, some Valium, chanting 'fear is the mindkiller' mantra and a single plush toy was all it took. The drug to chill me, the mantra for obvious reasons, and the plush toy to hold and channel all the fear i was feeling, into squeezing frack out of it. Better it than some nurses hand, when she was trying to calm me. Still terrified of them, but I have proven if I survived that I can get by.
Seems like a lot of advice here is pretty much “just don’t be afraid”. Okay cool. 

The best advice I ever got from a psychologist about fear was “avoidance only makes the anxiety worse”. By avoiding the thing that makes you scared, you’re reinforcing that pathway in your brain that tells you it’s scary. But if you look at it head on, you’re telling your nervous system it’s something you can handle.

If you can’t avoid needles, then how do you deal with them? It changes the framing from avoidance to support needs. 
Can you take a friend with you? Can you line up a little treat as a reward after? Can you take something to fiddle with to distract you while the blood draw happens? 

Sometimes focusing on a strong sensation can help distract you, like a sharp smell or music in your headphones. Or you can practice grounding techniques like breath work to keep you from focusing on the sense of danger you feel. 

It sounds like this is something you could really benefit from talking about with a psych. Maybe talk to another GP and see if they can prescribe you Valium or something. There’s lots of ways you can work towards being cool as a cucumber in the phlebotomist’s chair. :)
They won’t knock you out BUT there are some doctors who can do it with laughing gas or the green whistle to make you high as hell.
A psych is best as others suggested, but I wonder if hypnotherapy may work also.
As someone who has to have frequent blood tests for a variety of medical conditions - most things they tests for with a blood test have no current alternatives. A thorough test set may include urine tests or a stool test - but for the most part they need blood. 

The suggestions to work with a therapist to identify the cause of your phobia and work out a coping strategy is probably your best long term plan. They might teach you some meditation or self hypothesis type techniques to ‘distract’ you from the tests. 

On a purely practical level - even if it’s not a fasting test - try to avoid coffee/caffeine before the test and make sure you have drunk plenty of water. It will help minimise any potential pain and make it easier for the technician/nurse to find the vein. 

My current record is 13 vials from a single path slip. And 11 cannulae insertion attempts on a single day for a series of imaging tests that required contrasts.
God my husband is the same. He ends up fainting every time, last time we ended up at the hospital.
I spoke to someone who treated their extreme needle phobia with VR recently and it really worked for them
Could you ask your Dr to give you a prescription for Valium to take before blood tests? I know they often will prescribe for people with a fear of flying.
There are sedation or medication options for people in your situation. This is not the same as full anesthetic. Speak to your GP again or to another one (if the test is really necessary)

Do you really need tthe blood test at this point. Does your GP think the test is essential? Sedating yourself simply to check your Vitamin D (etc) isn't worth it, but if there's supsicion of disease then yes it matters and you need to work out the method by which you can get it done
My brother. I am in the same boat. It has not been easy. 

I have had a mouth test for iron deficiency and urine/ stool tests in the past also. But their scope is limited.
Others mentioned psychologist which I think could be helpful. 

Also wondering, is the fear only about blood from the inner crease in the arm? You might have more success if trying the foot, hand or another location? I used to feel really sick at the idea of a needle in my inner arm 🤢🤢🤢 but hand or foot seemed less freaky to me. 

Also try to find a pathology that understands fear of taking blood. 

Also, others have said you can't go under - have you asked the doctor's for a valium/xanax? They can prescribe enough just for the withdrawal (maybe 2 tablets).
I used to faint during blood tests. Now I just pinch my self really hard while they’re drawing blood and look the other way. It has seemed to help.
Maybe look into getting a nurse come to your home to have the blood drawn + some kind of anti-anxiety medication, that’d probably be the most feasible comfortable environment
I’m studying nursing and did a population health placement a few months ago where we gave people free health checks in an office. There was one guy, around 45, who was very fit and healthy. He was all sunshine and smiles until he noticed the blood sugar lancets on the table. His demeanour changed in an instant. I told him he didn’t need to have his blood sugar tested, but his colleagues were looking at him and I think he felt pressured. I put it off by taking his heart rate etc, but he was so fidgety that it was impossible. After about 10 minutes of me stalling and staying it was no problem if he chose to not have his BGL done, he finally gave in and was like “okay cool have a good one!”, jumped up and left the room. 

This guy’s colleagues were laughing about it and I felt so bad for him. It’s a legit and not at all uncommon fear. My cousin is just as bad as how you sound to be, she passes out the moment she sits in the chair. She started seeing a psychologist for it earlier this year and was finally able to get a blood test a few months later. It’s not like she waltzed into the clinic and was excited to get it done, but she didn’t pass out.

Unfortunately having your blood taken is the only option for the vast majority of tests. Pricking your finger like when measuring blood sugar only gives you a couple of drops of blood, and as Elisabeth Holmes showed, that’s not enough to accurately test things.
See a psychiatrist
I psyched myself out of a similar fear by convincing myself the procedure was being done to someone else, and I was only watching on. And it was essential for their health and welfare, and I was knowledgeable enough to know it was a good thing for them etc

Alternately, an amputation would provide the blood sample.
Other people have given you advice.

I've feinted multiple times. I've had two medical codes call on me (not crash codes, but.)

What helps me - though doesn't solve the problem completely  is...

1. Use a lot of Emla cream (chemist only). Put a fair chunk on (dont spread it - just one large lump then wrap it in glad wrap and sticky tape the glad wrap.

2. Call up and find one that has a proper lay flat bed (e.g, blackwood family medical practice, and many others at doctors)

3. Tell them you're nervous and need to lie down.

4. ???

5. Profit.

If this fails, psychologists.
There's a lot of good advice about phobia treatment and I encourage you to look into it as an increasing number of cardiac procedures are performed through a blood vessel puncture.
I used to have a phobia of needles (would get panic attacks and cry) and then I ended up on a medication that required weekly blood tests . The more I did them the less scary they became so I would just try force yourself to go
My situation is a bit different... I've had hundreds of blood tests and mentally I'm indifferent to them, but physically my body goes into shock; my blood pressure drops, I get cold sweats, and my head swims. The worst was having an epileptic fit in the middle of the test; one moment I'm trying to power through and stay concious, and the next I wake up on the floor and having no idea how I got there.



So I did generate some mental anxiety over blood tests... However with some techniques and processes I'm able to manage it. And sometimes I'm in and out like a normal person without a physical reaction, mostly my body didn't feel like it had to go into panic mode. I've gone from having an epileptic fit to mostly having no reaction in 9/10 of my last tests (the 1 is because I was in a bad mood and powered through despite breaking all my rules).



My suggestions:


 * Shop around. Find a location that you feel comfortable with. Even if it's arbitrary criteria it's important that you feel comfortable; I tend to like bigger rooms with lots of posters on the wall

 * Be completely upfront about your situation. There's no shame in it, and almost every nurse will have an anecdote that it's always the big burly men who usually have issues with blood tests

 * Ensure the nurse takes it seriously. If they don't try to find a place to lie you down then just up and leave, it ain't worth it. I don't need to lay down anymore, but I do look at how the nurse reacts to being told my situation

* Experienced nurses are usually the best. They tend to not panic when they notice me go white and just bring up a topic to distract me. Recently, a rookie kept asking me if I was ok with a slight panic in her voice (I'm a big dude and she wouldn't be able to move me) and I remember saying "fuck" as I went under and fainted on her. The needle wasn't even in yet... but a day or two later at the same clinic with someone experienced I had absolutely 0 issues
* In my case I ask for strong alcohol wipes that I hold and sniff when I feel the onset of a physical reaction. A nurse once suggested it to me, and look, I'm aware it probably does absolutely nothing but it's basically my security blanket; just knowing I have it helps. My theory that the strong smell distracts my brain from hitting the panic button


These are just some of the steps I go through... there's more arbitrary ones I have, but the key is to work through it and figure out how to create your safe space
I have been helped by hypnosis for a similar but different issue. I have seen hypnosis work for fears. Find a good  practitioner, discuss what they think is possible and commit to several sessions. And ideally choose someone who also has credible counseling qualifications.
I'm type 1 diabetic since age 10, so 18 years so far. This means getting lots of vials taken every few months, daily injections, daily finger pricks and keeping glucose monitor needles under the skin 24/7. All I can say is don't be a bitch and suck it up. Be greatful you don't have a condition which requires this constantly and next time you're scared of a needle think of those countless people who are far worse of you than you and would give anything to be in your position.
Just gotta sick it up mate, people do it all the time and there are no problems. No one like needles, no one likes having their blood taken.
I had my first blood test when I was six and the complete fuckwit nurse tore my vein open while trying to do it. It obviously gave me a life long fear of blood tests. It didn’t help when I got seriously sick a few years later and required even worse than blood tests. At one point, I was kicking doctors in the face and it would take a half dozen adults to hold me down. At one point I needed a bone marrow test and the doctors just went “nup… fuck that… he’s going under general”. 🤷🏻‍♂️

Anyhow; fast forward a few decades and I’ve had to have blood tests as an adult. I do remember one time about 10 years ago, I walked in and the nurse goes “chair or bed?”. She took one look at my face, looked me up and down and goes “get on the bed; you’re too big for me to pick up!” 😂 

I’m not so bad these days and it just got to the point where I knew I had to suck it up and push through it. It helps to think of the benefit at the other end. Finding out what’s wrong (or isn’t) and being able to fix it. I was deficient in Vitamin D around the start of COVID and A LOT of studies came out about that during COVID too. I dramatically increased my levels (requiring blood tests every few months to track) and it has dramatically changed my health and life. 

I still stress a bit about getting them and end up very sweaty. The trick for me now after getting over the debilitating fear is to NEVER look at what the nurse is doing after you sit down. Every nurse I’ve had these days picks up on it without saying anything. I just chat crap to them (often initiated by them) and look the opposite way while chatting. It’s usually over so fast and honestly, half the time don’t even feel it. It might be hard, but you will be able to do it. It’s just a matter of pushing through the mental barrier long enough to do it.
Nope, you should probably check your cholesterol and long-term blood sugar, and you'll need blood tests for that.

Can you get your GP to give you something to take the anxiety away, and they draw the blood? Also, take someone with you so they can support you, and drive you home because you'll be a bit loopy 😂
you could take some valium before hand. happens all the time.
^(After thought edit: My doctor once prescribed a creme called Elmna or Emla or similar which numbers the inject site. You wont feel a thing.)

I was like you. I've had needles my entire life and I threaten nurses and doctors by saying "you hurt me, and I will hurt you'.

I had open heart surgery in the 60's and have had so many needles my ass is like a pin cushion.

Due to an Aortic Dissection 12 years ago I get regular CT scans and needles. I'm shitting my pants every time.

I'm now 62 years old with a blood cancer and require constant blood tests and bone marrow biopsies.

I am getting better and my tips are;

1. Be well hydrated. If you are not hydrated needles hurt more.
2. Choose an arm and always get is there. I favour my left arm for bloods, vaccination, Cannulas ( I get these all the time ), etc.
3. Relaxing is key, a tense muscle will make it worse.

Most nurses can insert the needle and I feel nothing. There occasional painful ones do not last long.

Bottom line, I feel your pain and if you live in Perth I'll happily come with you as a distraction.
Just look the other way and ask them not to show you the needle
I’d love to know too. I’m 33 years old and have never had a blood test in my life.
Ask for a butterfly needle. Its basically a mosquito. You wont feel a thing. This is all in your head btw. I use to be the same. Now i just tell myself my brain is playing a trick on me by being scared of it and get it over and done with. Just remind yourself theres literally no more pain than a pinch and you wont feel a thing. And dont look lol.
Finger prick sample collection is possible for a lot of things. Some people find that more acceptable than the vein puncture method. You can go to almost any blood collection lab in Australia for this with a standard request form from your GP, very occasionally a collection location won't have the right equipment, but can tell you where the next closest one is. Whenever this comes up, I generally ring the lab in advance and check if it's a test that can be done on a finger prick sample before printing out the form. Fair warning, it does hurt a bit as once the finger is pricked, the collector will need to squeeze and milk out blood. There are also finger-prick home test kits you can buy online and DIY if it's only one thing you want to check (e.g. iron test kits exist, I think vitamin D too).


And there are some things that can be tested for on urine, but it's not routine at all in Australia and I don't know if Medicare would even pay for it. Maybe someone here will work at a path lab and know. I've seen "nutritional" and "wellness" urine tests that you can order online so that you just pay for it yourself and ignore Medicare, but I've never worked out if they're legit or not! If they're TGA-approved, they should be, so you could check that before ordering one.
I'm the same, terrified of blood tests and can't even book an appointment where I'm planning on talking about it without vomiting and getting light headed. GP was going to prescribe me some valium to help. Didn't help because I couldn't walk in the door knowing it was going to happen. Sat in the car park dry heaving for a while, after spending the whole morning vomiting and lying on the floor from dizziness in anticipation.

Tried all the behavioural and distraction advice ever written, but unless I'm drugged out of my mind for a few hours before and completely asleep when it happens, it's never going to happen.
I have a severe medical phobia and touch aversion so I also can'tget myself to do medical tests. I've seen a psychologist who says I need to work on sensory issues through OT. Since NDIS,  OTs are too expensive even with a mental healthcare plan. So my GP has given my valuim and codeine to take so I can enter the forever sleep peacefully if I ever require emergency healthcare or just can't cope anymore. It's really unfair that some people get tens of thousands of dollars to access art classes and respite holidays for therapy but for those of us without the 'golden diagnoses' can't get actual therapy just to stay alive.
You could ask your GP for a full urine workup.
That could cover a lot things bloods cover.
If  you want to rule out inflammatory probs you could ask for ultra sounds or CTs.
There's even Bowl tests you can get done where they test your stool and can look for pre cancers etc and bowl health..  if that helps?
All non invasive procedures
No. First time I've heard that a psychologist could help here. Never thought of this.
Can you take a valium before your blood test? And also use a numbing agent. As long as someone is with you to see you home after it and the pathology lab knows your plan in advance it might be worth a try. Definitely still plan to see a psychologist for a long term solution.
Needle phobia not so much as I got shots (was scared but not impossible). Its more of a veins/blood/needle combination.
I agree with this. OP what are you going to do if someday you wind up in hospital? They will take your blood whether you want to or not in there, it won’t be a choice. Nobody enjoys blood tests but they’re better than having things like blood cancer, which is in no way detectable via urine, go untreated
As someone who has dealt with various phobias (not overcoming all of them, but some) -- This is what OP needs to hear.

Unfortunately in the case of phobias coddling and avoidance does not help. You need a bit of tough love. That's not to say the solution is to, say, have someone ambush OP with a blood draw--those kinds of sudden immersions also are harmful--but OP either needs to get professional help to baby step up the ladder of exposure, or work through a step change plan themselves. 

And OP, don't avoid the people who are trying to help you either. You need to sit a bit with some discomfort, and it's worrisome that you've gone 15 years without a blood panel. Tough love moment: You need to get this done because the alternative of not detecting something early is much, much worse than the blood draw itself.
Thanks. Right now reading all the comments and imagining me in the lab chair is giving me extreme chills, almost paralysing fear just thinking about it. Maybe a mental health check up would be good.
They did but again it would need me to be aware that the test is happening, which is what will never make me go there to get it done.
Never thought it could be a therapist thing.
Interesting. You were good and you pretended to be unaware of what she was going to do. My mind overworks I guess.
But a tattoo is a needle?
100% this. I think it will also help if OP tells his partner or a friend that "I'm going to do it - if you come with me and support". I say this because I'm a naturally very avoidant person and I struggle with internal motivation. If I make plans with someone it helps to see things through.
This is a better way of putting what I think I was trying to say in my reply. You have to get to that place mentally where you know it has to be done, so what’s the best way to do it and get me out the other side.
To add to this great advice, the last pathologist that I saw advised me to up my water intake for 48 hours before the test and it really helped. 

The previous attempt had failed as I wasn’t hydrated enough, despite drinking lots of water the night before. 

OP I’ve been in your shoes, terrified of needles due to some painful experiences when I was a child. Covid was a big turning point for me, I decided I was more terrified of that than a needle. 

As already suggested, I talk to the provider about my anxiety, don’t ever look at any of the equipment or what they’re doing, distract my self with deep breathing, playing with my phone, pinching myself, talking to the provider about random topics, whatever feels best at the time. 

I did used to get quite upset. I would be sure to discuss this with the provider so they were aware there would be tears and sobbing (I would already be crying at this stage), but to just ignore it which they’ve all been really good with. 

I’ve now got to the point I can get through with literally a tear or two at most. I don’t enjoy going but I do come out each time with a real feeling of empowerment that I’ve come so far. 

Now instead of avoiding the free flu shots at work, I book in immediately to get the earliest appointment time!

OP you can do this! Get a referral to a psychologist from your GP, you’ll be amazed at what you are capable of when you put your mind to it.
Whats VR?
Its not critical. It was suggested so I know why I am feeling so low and depressed.
This is a very interesting point thank you. I do find that the arm option really makes me sick (+hand). Do you think its possible to take it from the calves? They have tougher skin and out of sight.
I have a friend who used to pass out at the mere mention of blood draws. I remember one day I came into the office after getting a draw done, he saw the bandage on my arm and immediately passed out. 

Took him a few years to build past that anxiety but thankfully got to the point where he can now do them without issue. It definitely sucks when someone builds up an anxiety block around something!
My cousin was all set to study medicine when she discovered she had a blood phobia In the end she found a specialty in sports medicine that didn't require as much exposure to blood, but she'd been all set to be a surgeon before that.
Yep- this too.  I fucken hated needles- avoided doctors for 14 years. But, then I got cancer, so it was straight up non-negotiable and I was getting blood tests once back home one to two times a week.  Really depends on the phlebotomist- if you find a good one, get their days and go only when they’re on.  Call the office and ask who they recommend for fearful patients- every pathology company will know where the magical phleb is who can do it without pinch (this does depend somewhat on OP having good veins).
This is even less helpful than the cup of concrete suggested by someone else. Why the need to belittle someone who’s asking for help?

It sucks that you have to deal with all of that—truly; I’m sorry that’s your situation. But calling someone a bitch and guilting them with all the “think about how hard it is for me” stuff is just macho, shaming bullshit. 

Maybe you have some shit to grieve about your own life- I know how hard it can be to accept the crappy limitations of disability! It’s not OP’s fault you have diabetes though, and shaming them doesn’t help anyone.

edit: also, phobias are legitimate anxiety conditions, and can increase the risk of suicide - they’re not a joke or something to dismissively ‘envy’.
Some people really out that they don't understand how phobias work. Phobias aren't logical, and it's not just about being tough.

A friend's mum has a deathly fear of *buttons*. Yes, regular clothing buttons. Started when she was a child and almost choked on one. It has rendered her pretty much housebound, and people entering the house have to be checked for and cover buttons. Unfortunately she won't get psychiatric treatment for it, so she's pretty much stuck like that. But it's not that she's not 'tough', she has a fundamental miswiring of her fear responses, so that to her, looking at buttons is like holding her arm in a roaring fire. Very few people would be tough enough to do that.
I used to be deathly scared of needles and this is bad advice.  Butterfly is a smaller gauge, means it’s in the arm for longer getting the draw, so more time to freak out. Lie down, look away,  count backwards from 99, rub your collarbone with the free hand- anything to help distract.

The fear is fixable- I have to inject myself nowadays, and I don’t have a choice, so I’m at ease with the process but it took a few years.
Many times these tests will:

(A) Not catch the things that are important to catch (cholesterol, blood sugar -- urine is not as reliable -- liver panel, etc)
(B) Not be covered by Medicare/insurance if they didn't already have a reason to get them done. Most doctors aren't going to prescribe expensive imaging if there's no other indicators of a condition, and Medicare will not cover these just because a person has a blood draw phobia
Please look into a psychologist who treats phobias. There are many people who have severe phobias of blood tests (or some combination of blood/injection etc) and treatment can be amazingly effective when done by an experienced person. 

The research shows the best results with a specific therapy called cognitive behavioral therapy with exposure. This means they will help you understand your anxiety, process your thoughts about it (cognitive skills) and understand your body cues.  and then help you to actually start facing your fear in a gradual and supportive way (behavioural exposure). 

If you are near any large universities with an associated physiology clinic then they can be a good place to find these sorts of providers. Or feel free to message me with what region you live in, as I know of a few providers in this field.
This is their bread and butter!

Read the above comment. The thing I would mention is that this does take work, and you have to be committed to it because it's not the most comfortable thing.

You need to go back to your GP - if the blood tests are super urgent, then you're going to need to find another solution but otherwise you could consider getting a mental health care plan and a referral to a psychologist for this.
So it's the first time you heard of a psychologist helping you with a problem that is, at your own admission, "all in your head"?

What... What did you think they do?
Oh! I suggest you watch a few episodes of that show on SBS with the people with severe food phobias. Literally called 'extreme food phobics' - it's on the on demand app. The last episode both people had amazing results after one 90 min psychology session. Went from physically spasming at the idea of a bit of melted cheese to eating spaghetti bolognese with barely any hesitation a few hours later. The power of the mind when it's set on the right path is amazing!

i strongly recommend you pursue the psychological side, as unfortunately tracking blood levels is really important with AS especially with the different medications and their side effects, and as you get older, the likelihood you will find yourself having surprise medical procedures will increase, so if you can bolster yourself now so you can cope with them better, you will really be doing yourself a big favour. You don't want to end up in a situation where for instance you need medical treatment but put it off because the procedure requires something you don't react well to (e.g. I am assuming you wouldn't react well to a canula? Pretty standard thing for any kind of medical procedure).

Make sure you get someone experienced in treating medical phobias of your type though, as not all phobias are the same.
Seconding this, I used to drive my (very loopy on Valium) friend to any appointments that required a needle. She was totally fine with it all, giggling and laughing away...super relaxed.

Yes, in the long run getting therapy to reduce the problem itself is best but in the meantime you can tell your GP about the issue, ask for a script, and get someone you trust to take you to the GP for the test.
Do you tell the pathologist you are shit scared of needles? It happens all the time and they usually steer the conversation away and keep you preoccupied. Or, have a friend, or even parent come with you. We are stubborn so will tend to put on a brave face if others are there watching.
They would still have the right to refuse to consent to have blood taken.  If they came in unconscious it could be taken then but we're not going to restrain them to collect it.
I worked through a spider phobia when I moved to the bush. It was that or literally going insane because I had lots of encounters. 

I started by taking photos with a long zoom lens and then processing them on my computer and got closer and closer until I could sit with one in the room. 

I think if I had a needle phobia I'd look at safe photos or videos online, try going to the blood bank with a friend (without donating) and same with vaccines. I dunno, just throwing it out there.
to build on what some others have said, one particular aspect of some therapies is reframing. The statement "will never make me go there" is definitive. It completely ends all possibility of change from the get go. You've been able to assess that the awareness of it causes problems, which is great, but qualified that with it being impossible.

Beginning to reframe this can start to open the door. Like: "which is what makes this really difficult/really hard/hardest thing i can think of doing". All of those statements still capture the struggle you're experiencing, but something that is difficult/hard is not impossible. And so a small step is made towards the end goal.

This is a somewhat simplified version of a step that can be taken in therapeutic approaches like CBT (cognitive behavioural therapy), DBT (dialectical behavioural therapy), narrative therapy. The how of the reframing depends on the therapy and therapeutic approach of the therapist and you. It's also just a small part and not the entire strategy of the therapies.
20cc of concrete would be the thing for that, mate.
Phobias and severe mental blocks are what therapists treat on the daily.
If you have something that is ‘all in my head’, then  someone who deals with in your head stuff is the person to see.   15 years and this never occurred to you or any of your friends?
It’s a great starting point! If it’s something you’ve struggled with it is absolutely ok to ask for help.

As we get older needles and blood tests  are going to become a bigger and bigger part of life so addressing the issue now will only help you In the long run.
I think if was more that I was in a comfortable environment and that she was so careful and caring.
I hate medical environments, they creep me out and make my mind overwork.
Virtual reality, they had exposure therapy which started with pictures and eventually had simulated blood tests with a headset on, they said it was really hard at the start but eventually she just stopped caring. It hasn’t completely got rid of the fear (only weirdos like blood tests…) but she can have treatments now
They would need to find a vein... and while I have seen Injecting drug users find veins there, I'm not sure about pathology workers giving it a go. What about foot??? 

Also deff look into taking valium when you go. You'll feel very different!
Intent wasn't to belittle, it could be the change of perspective they needed so worth a try.
Yeah, I think you’re right about the ignorance/lack of understanding. Phobias are largely so frustrating in my experience *because* they’re illogical. 

I developed a phobic response to spiders (seemingly randomly) in adulthood. Like, I used to let daddy long legs spiders crawl up my arms as a kid, and would fearlessly protect my siblings from huntsmans\*. Then, over a few years in my 20s, I started noticing I found them more & more ‘gross’, until eventually I was terrified and paranoid, checking repeatedly for spiders under ledges/in nooks, and having to call my neighbours over to kill a whitetail the one time I actually found one. I have OCD, and the phobia feels really linked to that mindset somehow, like I can really fucking spiral and become incapacitated by it! 

\*hunstmen? idk how to pluralise that; nothing seems correct lol

Also, idk if I’ve seen you mention the woman with the button phobia elsewhere on reddit recently, or if it’s just common enough that I’ve come across a very similar story before, but yeah- that poor woman. It would be so hard to avoid buttons! Seems random, right? But not at all surprising- another interesting one I heard recently was a woman’s phobia of anchors. It’s a real shame your friend’s mum isn’t open to therapy, I feel sad for her.
Its not bad advice youre bad advice! If hes afraid of the pain and it doesnt hurt or feel it then thats a win! Id also recommend lightly punching/hitting the wall so you feel pain elsewhere then focusing on the arm with the needle.
Coz no one's suggested this. People are too busy being surprised at a middle aged man scared of a prick to the arm.
Yeah we tried that, and yes to all your ideas too. The problem is me or in my head, where I just am too scared to even go as I know all these distractions are fake, and the test is going to happen. Yes its dumb.
Unhelpful
Interestingly, never did. I was told to toughen up, which makes sense. I just havent been able to.
I just looked up needle phobia - have you seen needle calm? Seems like a new product. 

Also a few clinics popped up helping people with needle phobia. 

(I know you said it's not needles just taking blood, but they'd still help with either)
you should try not being a cunt. hows that for a change of perspective.
I felt myself getting that way about bees and wasps at one point, where I'd avoid the garden for fear of encountering one, but that at least is somewhat logical. Fortunately it didn't go any further, especially as later on my walk to school involved walking through a literally stream of bees from some backyard beehives - or maybe that exposure even helped? I would think something like OCD though would unfortunately make you far more like to develop phobias - to what I've read, some of the mental loops seem similar.
Maybe they just figured a grown adult could use Google to solve an issue that heavily impacts their life?
Interesting. That must be shit, sorry man. Defeats the point, but what about drugs? Benzodiazepine?
Have someone else take you so it’s not so easy to ditch. Unless you’re going to punch your mum in the face when she tries to get you in the car, you can definitely make yourself go

First step is to admit that you *can* do this, you just don’t *want* to. It may be a very extreme want, but it’s still a want. If you can’t admit that then you will never get better
Hold on let me take some insulin via needle
Is that something like Valium? I've not taken any of the drugs being mentioned here.
