Hey, tomorrow I'm calling fair work as work is underpaying me, and I just want to hear what your experiences are with fair work in getting pay issues resolved, including if you got anything extra out of it, like interest and or super. 

Heres the short of what's happening with me, I've noticed they aren't paying me correctly, underpaying by a few dollars per hour, I've contacted work via email to ask about this and most I got was from my manager who said "I've forwarded this to the correct department". I gave them a two week deadline to get back to me and they never did. It's been a bit over that deadline. I'm also a causal and they have since stopped giving me shifts after about 2yrs of regular shifts each week (yeah I suspect retaliation and I'm questioning if I want to deal with that or not, I've already started looking for a new job). There's a possibility that they haven't been paying me correctly for years at this point and as far as I can tell there are no agreements in place, so I should be paid according to the award.

Also I'm not in a rush to get this sorted, I understand fair work will take their time and it could be months before it gets sorted, that's fine, I'm motivated to do this mostly because of how shit they are being. 

Anything you can share is awesome, thanks.
I worked indirectly with the fair work ombudsman for a few years. Cases of people being underpaid almost always go your way, because there's a paper trail and it's able to be proved.

I'm not sure what you mean by will you "get anything extra out of it". You didn't win a prize. You'll get what you were owed and not paid
Fair work can be very hit or miss, all depending on who you get the day of your meeting. If you have a union it's far better as they can adequately represent you but I read in the comments that you don't so in that case it may be worth looking into if there are some places willing to offer you free legal advice. If you have a solid paper trail, read up on the laws and your contract then you should able to be represent yourself well.
You'll likely be told to seek legal advice by Fairwork, Fairwork itself very rarely takes action unless a big stink is kicked up by the media or someone important.
we had issues with a former staff member and fair work was pretty quick and easy to deal with. i think they did a good job of being balanced and hearing out both sides of the argument while encouraging everyone to come to a resolution and providing good resources for both sides about their legal requirements. i would say yeah, keep following it up.
Had this happen when I worked at a popular ice skating rink in the mid 2010s and the process can take ages if the business drags their feet. 

It took us a year to get back paid while the staff who informed everyone about the underpayment lost all their shifts (everyone casual besides management). The general manager was fired during this process which was a good thing considering how the place was being run. 

I had 6 years of backpay due which I had payslips for but the business only needs to keep 4 years of records so that didn't matter. We were paid cash in a payslip and their filing system was very dated (mostly paper). So they dragged it out for 12 months and saved themselves an extra year of paying me correctly!
If you a member of a union I’d suggest giving your organiser a call and letting him know about your situation, they can resolves things quite quickly 
Victoria has a different government department to complain to. South Australia has a different government department to complain
Cases can be prioritised by how many complaints a particular employer receives.   
So if you've had a case of underpayment, get your colleagues to also check. 

If there's 1 case, there might be 3. If there's 3, there's likely many.
[deleted]
What I mean by extra is like super, as super should have been paid out on it... But is that a fair work issue or is that more of an ATO issue as ATO deals with super issues. 

That reminds me I should check that they have paid my super.

I get that I'm not winning a prize, well ok fucking them over is a prize in my head.

But knowing that it almost always goes my way is good to know so thanks.
>I'm not sure what you mean by will you "get anything extra out of it". You didn't win a prize. You'll get what you were owed and not paid

The stress and time cost of following it up is work, and should be paid IMO. Or at least, the time cost should be tax deductible at the hourly rate for the work you're trying to get paid properly for. The more resistant and obtuse the wage thief is, the more I should get paid for finding and fixing their mistake.
Shouldn’t you get at least interest as well?
Nah I'm not in the union. Kinda pissed with myself that I didn't join years ago but such is life I chose what I thought was best for me at the time.
Was with AWU at last job and they were fkn useless
Unfortunately I have zero contact with colleagues. My work is solo and isolated.

That being said, I absolutely do believe that they are being underpaid like me, and fair work did ask if I knew if others were being underpaid, I told them I don't know but suspect it.

Now I'm just waiting for them to call back for the next steps.
Incorrect. It doesn’t matter what size the business is, they must all comply with the law.
Yeah they will have to pay you anything they were supposed to and didn't. Which means super. But just be aware of a few things. Firstly it's quite easy for them to keep delaying it, and it might take a while to get the full amount out of them. And don't forget tax, whatever they give you will then be taxed
[deleted]
It’s never too late my friend 
If it's the SDA then they are useless and you saved yourself some union fee's.
Ok, so keep chasing it up and don't give up basically. 

But yeah I'm not in a rush to get what is owed, I have plenty saved luckily. 

Also as a side note I suspect that they aren't paying any of us correctly, I'm probably just the only one that's pissed off enough to do something about it.
Would they have to pay some amount of interest as well?
>If it was stressful, then you knew about it and should have done something about it sooner.

I did something about it. Have you ever had to fight with an employer? You don't sound like you have. It took me 18 months to get paid, despite constant agitation with admin about it. I only got paid when I did because the squeaky wheel gets the grease. My employer had been put on notice (and along the way hired one of the corrupt big four consultants to ~~audit~~ help cover up their theft, paid for with taxpayer money) in 2020 and as of the end of 2023 had managed to figure out backpaying approximately 18% of what they now estimate they owe to underpaid casual employees.

>If you didn't know about it, then it can't have been stressful

Tertiary education was deprived financial support during the pandemic, whilst simultaneously the wage theft was being ratcheted up. Regardless of employee awareness, that's disgusting behaviour affecting the lives of myself and my colleagues at a time when Australians needed to support each other the most. My experience being stolen from by a public institution whilst simultaneously deprived of support during a pandemic has changed my attitude to my obligations to my fellow citizen and country.

Edit: My most firm suggestion is that chasing up what I am owed from wage thieves is an input cost to my labour, therefore that cost (which is my time, and should be valued properly) should be deductible from my taxable income. The longer that takes, the more of my time is expended, the larger my labour input costs, the larger deduction from my taxable income due to costs associated with earning that income.
Nah different union for me, I work security.
[deleted]
Not sure what point you're making (I haven't commented under any other username in this thread), but it appears to me like you're attempting to deflect from the substance of the discussion. Do you have anything to contribute in response or are you just trying to distract the comment thread from your naivety?
[deleted]
I expressed how I think things should work. You suggested that they shouldn't work like that because

>If it was stressful, then you knew about it and should have done something about it sooner. If you didn't know about it, then it can't have been stressful

I addressed these points.
[deleted]
>No. I didn't "suggest things shouldn't work like that". I factually stated that they don't.

This is a fair rebuttal. I associated two of your statements in that way because they were both in the same comment, but I can see I was perhaps wrong to do so.

Regardless, the time and stress cost of figuring out getting paid properly has taken a significant personal toll on me. I tried getting help from FWO, but they seem to be a bit overwhelmed. I tried getting help from legal aid, but that didn't seem to go anywhere. I tried getting help from the relevant union, but they weren't interested (because the majority of the union's members are the work supervisors of casual staff, so they are effectively a union composed of my boss). Worth noting that the total amount of underpayments at my employer is now (estimated to be) high 8 figures.

Since you claim to be an expert, I'd be interested to know what you think I did wrong. What do you suggest that I might have done differently, to avoid a personal time and stress cost, so that I might have instead managed to (as you put it):
>If it was stressful, then you knew about it and should have done something about it sooner. If you didn't know about it, then it can't have been stressful
