The magpies, king parrots, kookaburras and cockatoos that visit our house are all quite confident and not fearful, but the Corrawongs never quite get comfortable. I even see them getting bullied by baby magpies which is a funny sight.

Is there an evolutionary reason Corrawongs, despite being large birds, are so timid?


I love currawongs
They are sneaky, opportunistic and predatory and assume everyone else shares their grave character flaws and is to be avoided.
It's mostly linked to diet and behaviour, these guys will eat more or less anything , including small mammals, reptiles and even eggs and chicks of other birds. They tend to get mobbed and driven off by other birds who recognise the risk and they also try not to scare off prey.
they approach potential food sources in a slightly less direct manner and are on the look out incase they're rumbled.
I used to have one that came into our dining room daily and shat everywhere. Eventually I caught it in a possum trap (accidentally), let it go the next day. I’ve never seen a bird fly so far, so straight and so long. It was like a bullet till out of site. Don’t think he came back inside again.
Maybe you should ask him what's currawrong?
There was a really bold one that hung around outside the Frankston Arts Centre that would steal your chips and eat from your hand if you wanted to feed it. Anyone from the area know if it's still there? I haven't been for years, but they have pretty long lives.
Currawongs get reasonable friendly once they get to know you…
I had a family of Magpies and a family of Currawongs in our backyard… they each kept to their half of the yard, although the Maggie’s were definitely the dominant ones. The mum currawong was a sweet and friendly bird and it broke my heart when she died protecting her babies when the tree they were in came down in a storm. They all ate us out of house and home with mince and bird supplement though!
One visits me occasionally and it vomits up its bugs at me..I’ve named it Chucky. I’ve often wondered if Chucky wants to feed me. I have no idea why it does this.
I had some not shy ones completely dig up my backyard lawn years ago I think they were eating christmas beetle larvae or some other large grubs but they dug tons of holes all over the place and seem to have a feast lol
There are birds alive today in your local community that remember a time when being spotted by a human was inevitably followed by a couple of rounds from a .22 air rifle.

It's incredible how good they are at it. Watching the ravens and the water dragons around here carefully position any handy tree trunk exactly between them and me is amazing.
They have so many different calls.  If you are lucky enough to live near a nest, they sing softly to their eggs and chicks all night.  The have a special happy song they sing sometimes.
I love their calls. They sound almost alien.
Out in our family property bear Barrington Tops, Dad had taught some to hand feed. They will grow trust in you.

Cute and very smart characters.
I know of one for the past few years that sometimes visits for berries. Met his wife and kid once.
You really don't want to get attacked by a currawong. If you thought maggies can get aggressive, currawongs can (very rarely) go full brutal roid rage - so you kind of want them to be timid. Fortunately you can enjoy their singing from a distance.
had one land on my picnic table once, eyeing my sandwich. they're bold when food's involved lol
They can make friends with people like maggies do. I had a couple in my garden who would hop around about 30cms from me when I gardened and would dart in and eat any worms and grubs  I'd turned up in seconds, no fear of me. It was really companionable actually. Lovely birds
I never knew how much we had in common!
It's this. Eating babies makes you unpopular!
I was thinking… what the heck! Shy has not been my experience with currawongs. This is the first I’m hearing about it.
Me too... Except unlike the currawong, I can't sing for shit.
They also come and steal the ghost chilli's off my plant while eyeballing me the whole time.
Not very neighbourly…
See? They're starting to trust you!
