
I don’t have kids, can I sell someone else’s?
The only stress in Richmond is deciding where to eat.
“How much for zee little girl?”
No contact number 🤬
I don’t think that's legal, maybe send them to the mines and garnish their wages?
I don't know if Jake and Elwood would approve.
'The women! I want to buy the women, the little girl... Sell me your children!'
A Modest Proposal
Who could afford kids in this economy.
How much for the little girl
Pro marketplace tip: Part them out first.
I guess it wont be long before the kids are put to work for the parents like Thailand and India. "we need a new caravan and holiday house, get on and go work"
I've seen that on an off-ramp on the eastern freeway, Melbourne
What on earth do the blues brothers have to do with that?
Who decides to spend their time and money making weird signs?
Hahahaha
Is this legal, man?
Sure, just give me a cut.
Ran into a very helpful drug dealer a few months ago on Victoria street. After walking up and down trying to decide where to have lunch he chased me down and asked me if I was looking to score. I said, "no, I'm trying to decide where to have lunch." He laughed and said, "best place is just down there, it's called such and such. Get the pho." He was right. It was delicious.
I’m @ Hanoi Pho right now. It’s all about the broth
Whilst evading the meth zombie army in Victoria street. 

But yeah, food’s awesome haha
And finding a parking spot.
"your women! We want to buy your women."
the children yearn for the mines
The film was them raising money to keep their orphanage open.

Unless the gag is that *they* were sold as children?
Or 'eat your young' by hozier for a song version
Kidneys as a pair of individual? Need to maximise profits.
Humans have been shitposting for thousands of years, it's just a bit of fun.
Graffiti artists. It's called a paste up.
Only if you don't get caught.
Sorry, I don’t sell by the slice
Drug dealers really are community leaders
I’ve never been to Richmond but surely it can’t be that hard to park 60+kms from the CBD?

EDIT: my bad, clearly not Sydney
I believe that these days, it's de rigeur to solve mortgage stress by discreetly sending the missus out to become a sugar baby.
Heh, heh. I forgot about the orphanage.  
  
Strange reference for a paste up on mortgage stress.   
Maybe the pastee thinks they were selling kids...
Fiiine, I’ll just have to keep them.
Think you've got the wrong Richmond
Onlyfans is nothing like Sofa King or Bed Bath n Beyond.
It's one of the most McGuffinny McGuffins I can think of.
I’ll take a slice, needed something for the bbq
You are 100% right. For some reason i thought i was in the Sydney subreddit.. you'd think the Yarra and Tram signs might have been a giveaway. Geoguessr fail.
Heh, heh. You're a McGuffin.
