I got my first ever juicer and just used 4 apples to make juice for my child (she didn’t like the pulpy juices I made in the thermomix). I’ve put the pulp in the fridge. I generally don’t like wasting food and groceries and expensive these days. I’m thinking that I can perhaps use leftover juicer pulp when I make smoothies, but are there any other easy things that people do? Eg cook/bake it into stuff? I think I would mostly be juicing apples, oranges, celery, carrots. Soft fruits like berries are more likely to go straight into smoothies. Thank you!
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
I add mine into apple muffins as it really ups the apple flavour.
You can make fruit leather by dehydrating it. Pretty good for snack food.
Start a worm farm - good education for kiddo, great for the garden and they'll eat that pulp up gladly.
You can make muffiins ( [https://lovetobeinthekitchen.com/2016/04/11/healthy-juice-pulp-muffins/](https://lovetobeinthekitchen.com/2016/04/11/healthy-juice-pulp-muffins/) ) and quickbreads ( [https://www.foodnetwork.com/recipes/juice-pulp-quick-bread-2697012](https://www.foodnetwork.com/recipes/juice-pulp-quick-bread-2697012) ) !
sorbet
Bit of apple would go well in a Japanese curry
Compost?
Waterbombs!

Okay okay.  Freeze into icecubes.
Fruit and veg pulp can be added to a variety of foods or frozen into cubes for a later date  Add to baked goods like cookies, cakes and muffins.  You can also add it to smoothies, pancakes, yoghurt, muesli, oats/overnight oats).  There's a lot of fibre in the pulp that your body will love!
I used pulp from veggie juice in a meatloaf. It tasted great and really upped the fiber and vitamin level of the meatloaf
Thank you everyone for all the suggestions! Great ideas. 😀 I have some inspired googling to do.
Apple pulp goes great in various dishes. Add it to cake to make it moist and delicious, or to curries to thicken them up. Cook it and mix with some juice to make apple sauce for pork, or mix it in with smoothies for extra fiber.

Lightly cooked it also goes well with yogurt...

Other fruits and vegetables are usable in similar ways. Vegetable pulps go great in soups in particular, or mixed in with mince for meatloaf or rissoles. I suspect you could also use it for pie filling to bulk out the contents of the filler.
Not sure about fruits like apples etc, but I add the pulp from veggies into bolognese sauce!
lasagna
Add it to a cake.
make sure you use the peels of citrus, dry it and have it as chips
Mmmm all pulp no juice!
I’ve used peels to make apple cider vinegar. I saved them by freezing and then when I had enough I started fermenting. Takes a bit of patience but is worth it if apple cider vinegar is something you use. I’m sure you could do the same with pulp, might just need a finer way of straining.
I've been experimenting with making crackers in my dehydrator. Not optimistic. You can't add very much before it makes them break apart or not dry correctly. I could mess around and add some drying/stabilising ingredients but at that point I dunno if it's worth it. 

Fibre is good for us though, I assume we'll be swallowing mouthfuls of the stuff like it's the cinnamon challenge in 10 years to make the most of any calories we can get, so to even think about it on this level should give us a head start. Fingers crossed
I give it to my chooks who turn it into eggs.
You can make tea from it or use it for compost. The tea is delicious.
I just recently got my juicer back out of the cupboard and started using it again. From someone with experience, I found that the main thing you wanna do with juicing is probably some kind of short-term cleanse. Long-term doesn’t make sense to be juicing regularly because you’re essentially doing a lot of extra work chopping, juicing and cleaning - for a lot of nutrients and no fibre. 

You need that fibre. So even if you do end up juicing regularly, it’ll probably be something that kind of sucks to try and eat a lot of. I found ginger and beetroot to be things that aren’t great in any other form apart from juiced. Celery, apples, oranges, pear are all much better in their original form for the fibre content but trying to drink ginger or beetroot juice is a bit gross so you’ll need to juice at least a few carrots, oranges etc to make it drinkable. 

Oh and I found trying to find reasons to use the pulp became more hassle than worth the trouble. The pulp is better put to use eating the fruit/veg rather than juicing it.
Taking out the pulp and giving her just the juice means ishe's getting a much stronger direct hit of sugar, and losing goodness in the fibre which is the point of eating fruit.
I like the one dat says shum pulp
Drik it or use as flavouring/liguid in a basic cake recipe. Some cake recipes do call  for it or can use it.

There are some ujicer where 'the pulp' is really only good for worm   food.
Yum
That sounds amazing, and lunchbox friendly. Will have to do a spot of googling!
Yes! But not citrus or ginger.
I did think of muffins but the quickbread idea is new to me! Thanks! Definitely on the list!
I should do this. This thread is making me crave apple desserts.
Just an old keens curry would be great with the pulp, a dash of vinegar and some sultanas
I have not ever heard of this option. I think I might have some japanese curry mix in the pantry…. Maybe this is the winning option for the week!! I’m curious as to how it affects it!
Effing ayyy !!!
That's a great idea.
I love fruit desserts so I’m thinking apple pie with the pastry as lasagne sheets and the apple (and the juice pulp) as the lasagne filling. 😂
Yeah I agree but unfortunately parenting is imperfect and young children famously don’t care about nutritional truths nor the underlying point of eating potentially healthy foods. 😂 Otherwise the kids menu at every cafe might look quite different. I tried giving the healthier pulpy version made in the thermomix but no go. Hopefully she will move onto that over time. This is more of an occasional weekend treat anyway, and still better than the boxed kid juices at cafes.
Are you gonna make the same stupid joke every time that comes up
Well, seeing as that's the only time I've made it so far, not sure. But I do like sopranos references. Maybe?
https://getyarn.io/yarn-clip/0ee98151-19f0-475e-a16b-746404249bda
