
Can I pat that DOWG!?
What psychopath mows before edging..
Nah fuck grass. Most people spend more time maintaining their grass than they spend using it.
Oh wow, a backyard... that's way out of my price range.
lawns in Australia are so dumb
I live in a very tree dense area, so my lawn doesn't just go dormant in winter, it really starts thinning out, and even dying off by late winter. 


My lawn will look like yours in 6-8 weeks, but right now, it's thin, yellow, and interspersed with weeds :( 
You havent finished! get back to work you
All I see is a big rectangle full of unneeded maintenance and no biodiversity.
Just here for the dog
Your doggo made me [think of this video](https://www.youtube.com/shorts/lE-RGpcrn_w).
No trees...

At least the neighbour has a single little one, I guess.
[deleted]
Of course haha
Really? Have I been doing it wrong?!
the edging always goes after mate
Not a single vegetable or fruit tree in sight :(


At least have a mulberry tree or something.
lawns ~~in Australia~~ are so dumb
Same here in Canberra.
Yeah I’m in Perth mate, non stop raining for the past few months but in summer it was just a dust bowl haha
Can confirm it’s finished haha
Pretty much.. but hey the dog loves it
Out of interest, what would you replace turf with? Knowing you also had a dog and two kids.
His name is Jedda 🤙
Mate if you mow first and snip last then you ruin the entire lawn ffs!!!, it leaves lumps of grass scattered everywhere.

You ALWAYS snip first, then run over it with the mower so you pick up all the grass.
Some actual plants on the ground will help retain that moisture.
Same. I’ve got two kids too. So it’s great to be able to and roll around in nice grass.
Obviously dependent on local climate (I'm from VIC and don't know what WA's like) but lavender and rosemary are pretty hardy, as well as plenty of eucalypts, whatever is native to the area. You may need to fence it off or use planter boxes until they're established so the dog won't get to them or if the soil is poor.

It's not like it needs to be a bush wonderland or look like the botanic gardens or anything, but all I see is one sad looking tree and *any* additional plants will help create shade and slowly improve the soil.

I haven't tried it myself, but it would be interesting to see if the [Miyawaki Method](https://www.sugiproject.com/blog/the-miyawaki-method-for-creating-forests) works in WA. Basically, you plant a bunch of plants very close to each other to mimic forest conditions, where plants try to compete for light, meaning they grow faster than jf you spaced them out like in many plantings I see.
Brother idk if you seen my comment but I said my whipper was fucked haha
I tell you hwhat, a meadow with lots of mint growing wild in it smells  incredible in a warm November rain
Yeah, nah. Unfortunately my doggie would destroy any one those ideas. Plus, the kids still need somewhere they can run on and roll around on without really hurting themselves or getting tangled.
If your backyard is the size of OP's you could use a third of it (fenced off with a bit of chicken wire or something) to grow veggies, herbs etc... and your dog and kids would still have ample space. You could even grow passion fruit on the chicken wire fence you're using to keep the dog out. You could mulch all the grass clippings from mowing the now smaller lawn to mulch into the soil of your garden. 


It's fun. Your kids could get to see and learn about fruit and veg growing too (when they take a break from rolling around in the grass).
Even clover is better than grass. Better for the soil, better for bees, only grows to ankle height so it doesn't need mowing.


It can be a problem when it flowers that you might be inundated with bees, but my kids and dogs haven't had much trouble. 
Hence the whole "fencing the area off" bit til they establish. And I'm not advocating that you use the majority of your lawn for this stuff, any biodiversity is good.

My MIL teaches a weekly bush kinder class in bushland (think snakes, bugs, mud, fallen trees and actual, well, bush) and they've never had a serious incident. Your kids will be fine.
We actually do have an area on the other side of the house for vegetables and herbs etc.
I have a just under one year old border collie x kelpie. It would probably destroy any temporary fencing within the day.
You're a legend then, mate.
