I've been bullied a fair bit & am looking for advice on how to avoid becoming a target in the future. Does anyone know an Aus-based coach/ mentor who can help. I was seeing a clinical psychologist, but tbh she wasn't too useful imo, so I'm not keen on seeing another psychologist. I'm in Melbourne, so can meet in person or online is also fine with me. 

I’d also appreciate any insights, strategies or lessons, good books. 

Thanks for your support.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Sorry to hear that you've suffered bullying. A good self defence class will teach you both strategies on how to not be picked as a victim by perpetrators, as well as what to do if the worst happens.
Psychologists and other professionals have to follow certain guidelines and are constrained by the range of advice they can give you.

They are likely to feed you unactionable platitudes.

I'll make it easy for you. Without knowing the context or literally any details, realistically your options will always amount to.

* Being the bigger person and ignoring it and hoping they move on
* Escalating and turning it on them, using either a sharp wit, powerful allies or violence.
* Removing yourself from the situation.

I don't know what other options people realistically can give you.
So sorry about that . Some people already recommended self defence class and I think that’s a great idea . Other ideas is joining a club , take up a hobby . When you are surrounded by friends and have more social connection , you will become more confident and be less of a target . You can then meet someone with more  life experience and leverage off that . About life coach , I dunno , I have met a few at social events and I honestly don’t see them as people I would like to take advice from , they don’t really have any real jobs …..Maybe I’ve met the wrong ones but just from my experience ….
My brother used to be bullied; he took up self defence classes.

He has never got into a fight but if someone bullies him he will stand up with confidence and then be left alone.
Have confidence in yourself. What others do/think doesn't matter, what matters is how you react to it. Be bigger than them (within yourself) the fact that their bullying you already makes them weaker than you. 

Sorry I can't help more but this is just what I've learnt as I've gotten oldey
Try an Improv beginner course. It was a game changer for me. Helped me get out of my head and comfortable with just being me in the moment. 

In the ACT there's ImproACT and they have an 8 week course (one night a week). It's fun and will help, I guarantee.
Join the PCYC and take up boxing. That’s the coach you need
Not sure if I constitute a coach, but I was picked on a lot as kid. But bullying was not a concern in high-school I went to after 15, and I made sure not to tolerate bullies among friends. So please take this as single anecdote from someone, who was not in a fight since they turned 12, and only really "solved" the bullying problem for 3 years. The no-fight part will be important.

Be the bigger person, figuratively. Avoid situations where being "challenged" by a bully can occur. Don't be friends with bullies. Don't go to places where bullies "hang out". Yes, you're ceding ground, but that is preferable to being bullied. And yes, regrettably this is not always the option. Do not associate with dickheads, just because they dominate your school social group. Make your own social group. Learn how to make friends, independent of people you were "assigned" by school (or employment).

Be the bigger person, mentally. Don't play the fool. Don't be the butt of your own jokes. Don't be the butt of your jokes without a retort. If you can't retort, learn how to banter. Don't make self-referential humor your only type of humor. Only share funny screw-up stories if others are doing the same. Verbal self defense is self-defense.

Be the bigger person, literally. This will be the toughest pill to swallow, but humans are simplistic. If you looks like a defenseless victim, you will attract predators. You don't have to become Schwarzenegger, but don't be the scrawny kid with hunch back either. Internally, you already know what is the cliche of nerdy kid that gets picked on. Don't be that. Find body-weight exercise or better, join a weight-lifting gym. Eat up. Learning to eat more is a skill. Radical self-love won't block fists.

Be and conduct yourself as someone who won't go down without a painful fight, if cornered. Even if you're bound to lose. There are psychos, who fight, for the joy of fighting. I can't help you with those. But the bullies I encountered were those who were sought to prove their superiority, by effortlessly dominating others. And violence was merely a tool for that. The moment I gave up and ~~stopped being afraid~~ became numb of the threat of painful fight, and started treating the physical conflict as inevitable, the abuse stopped after the second fight. I lost both of them. But once the bully knew, that I will not step down anymore, and will also focus on inflicting pain, instead of humiliation, suddenly they didn't want to "play" anymore.

I have not been in a fight since then. I abhor violence. But at the same time, I understand that if cornered and not left with other options, I will not go down without inflicting damage. And I act with that knowledge.

If the idea of getting hurt terrifies you, consider doing combat sport, like Brazilian Jiu Jitsu. You'll learn how to minimize incoming damage, and find that getting hit sucks. But maybe not as much as you thought it would.

I can't exactly recommend this strategy, if weapons are in the cards. Can't really provide any suggestions there, apart from notifying authorities and asking for the armed person to be searched, in a way that can't be traced back to you.

I'd love to tell you, that violence has no place in civilized society. But the cliche "when seconds matter, police are minutes away", exists for a reason. Substitute police with teachers, if applicable. The role of enforcement is primarily to deter by punishment. Not to be personal bodyguards. If perpetrators didn't know how to effectively avoid the authorities, they wouldn't be perpetrators. Your physical safety is your sole responsibility.

Good luck.
[deleted]
I also highly recommend Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT). It's usually a 20 week group and individual therapy course, but there's some great resources online to learn and apply. It should be mandatory in schools! 

Changed the course of my daughters life and was incredibly useful as an adult to use.

https://dbt.tools/index.php
[deleted]
Hit the gym and ink up.
QUICK! ANDREW TATE! IT'S YOUR TIME TO SHINE!
Ah, someone else also mentioned it in a comment above. I will look into it, thank you
Thank you, yes the psychologist wasn't giving me any pragmatic, actionable advise & it was frustrating to just keep discussing issues without discussing steps on how to resolve it
>Escalating and turning it on them, using either a sharp wit, powerful allies or violence.

The concept is based on the notion that that it is too much of a pain in the ass or puts them at risk to engage you. Consider how this was applied during the cold war where countries were arming themselves with nuclear weapons, the mechanism that kept things in check was mutually assured destruction (if I send a nuke at them, they'll send ten back). 

this ultimately led to diplomacy between the countries and de-escalation to prevent misunderstandings and worst-case scenarios. 



Yes, I know the civilized thing is to de-escalate, take the higher road etc, but that only works if there is a higher authority to mediate. Just be very careful and don't do anything illegal.
lol i definitely can relate to that, I joined a few meetups a few years ago because 'meetup' is like the first thing that gets recommendations as a way to make friends - it was littered with people trying to sell stuff or recruit me.

I remember this guy who was marketing himself as a ex-surgeon becoming a life coach. Was pretty suss.
Thanks, I am seriously considering self defence/ martial arts because it's such a popular suggestion
Thank you, I appreciate it
This was suggested on someone else's Reddit post. I think there's a similar thing in Melb as well, will look into it, thanks
Also, you will make many friends, your self esteem and confidence will improve and your health will improve
Thank you, I really appreciate the time you've put in to give me a detailed reply
That's really kind of you. Can I think about it & get back to you?
Thank you!
May I ask how that would help?
*INSTRUCTIONS NOT CLEAR: CRASHED CAR INTO GYM TO SHOW OFF COOL NEW MY LITTLE PONY ARM SLEEVE*
Please don’t do “women’s self defense” though. Much better off with something like Brazilian Jiu Jitsu
No wonder I'm stuck between wondering what is the right thing to do - escalate or de-escalate. Is it that there are no right answers, only "less bad" ones?
Yea “trying to sell stuff “ was definitely the term I was looking for lol . I find those ones predatory towards naive and vulnerable people .
Its all good on paper but I know the feeling, no matter how much verbal advice, it doesn't fix anything. It is true that school and Uni are a small portion of your life and your life will be drastically different and better once its over, but that doesnt help day to day. Its a fragile time that can affect folks for the rest of their lives.

Can you change schools? Is it possible to go to say, a catholic school in another district? If you tell your parents you no longer want to go to that school because you are afraid, they will listen. Exchange program overseas? Boarding school?

You don't have to 'stick it out'. When bad shit happens in your life sometimes its best to cut it out completely like a cancer. 

In saying that, I would still speak to a psychologist for the potential depression or long term affects bullying can have on you. Dont go in thinking they will fix the bullying, but go in talking about yourself and how its affecting you. Focus on building your confidence back up and realizing you are a very normal person in a shitty situation. It can cause issues in relationships down the line so its good to speak about it now with a proffesional.

Its a shit situation. Im really sorry its happening to you.
Thank you, yes a couple of others have also mentioned it so I am looking into it
Happy to help.
[deleted]
Ah, got it, thanks
Sounds like you're in a tough situation and you've received a bunch of advice on here, but at the end of the day, whatever decision you make, just make sure you can live with it. 

Whether it be to remove yourself from the situation, adapt and change or standup - your decisions shape you who are and how you navigate through the rest of your life.

  
not very useful am I.
Thanks, appreciate the advise. I had pretty much stopped going anywhere out but am trying to push myself a bit now.
Hi, this is actually beyond school. A couple of "friends" last year. I was seeing a psychologist but wasn't happy with her so stopped seeing her since last month, but am looking for a new psychologist
Lol, I'm looking for non violent ways of resolving things. But can I ask how it would help with confidence, because I've been low on that for a while
Well in that case, I would just completely cut them out of your life. If they are part of your greater friendship group, and cant be avoided, then look at making new friends. You dont need to associate with arseholes when youre an adult
at the very least it will teach you how to not get hurt - the point is to be able to defend yourself and minimise the harm they can do to you so you can run away!
Yes, I did cut them out, but it was incredibly hurtful. I used to think of them as my friends & everything fell apart so quickly, it was very unexpected (at least for me)
Thanks, will look into it
It will also make you a part of a team, a community. You will build relationships inside the class and feel like you are a part of something. Being involved in a community is all humans really want and need in life, so actively seeking out an interest or hobby will benefit ou anyway, but with the additional bonus of getting you strong, healthy and capable.
Yes that's true, thank you
