I watched the 'Day 8 recap' today from about 4pm with Leila McKinnon and Dylan Alcott and it was really good. They cover all the best bits and there's a good chemistry between them. Both are smart and funny.

They also have these little montages with good music selections coming back from the breaks.

So if you feel a bit overwhelmed with all the coverage and don't know where to start, give it a go.

I put 3pm to 5pm because the electronic program guide says that block of coverage started at 3pm, but I turned on around 4pm. Not sure if I missed other stuff, but saw lots of the highlights of day 8.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Alcott is creepy
Yep, those two are great presenters and always have something interesting to say.

On the first competition day of the games, I randomly switched on Channel 9 and Eddie McGuire's smug face was sitting behind the desk, couldn't switch the channel quicker.

During times where there are actual events on, I just use the 9now app to watch exactly what I want without the fluff, but yeah, 3pm to 5pm they do have some good content on.
I’ll be honest. Alcott reminds me of Kenny Powers if he was disabled and more boring. He sucks, huge ego, just an entitled guy in a wheelchair getting way too much exposure. Wish he would go away. No chemistry with others just a bitter dude.
Channel 9 is doing a pretty good job of the coverage. Always have the main events covered plus anything else where Aussies are competing. I also really like their live stream options in the app. Pretty good to jump into a specific sport if you’re interested in something.
He really messed up his profile in that year of being australian of the year with all the sex talk with his girlfriend. Its a shame, but he should have read the room and realised that people in the mainstream media simply keep that aspect private.
Glad I found it. I just want the highlights mostly.  
But I did watch the final hole of the golf. Great coverage.

Some sports are probably fun to play, but are not great to watch: water polo, kayaking...  
  
I saw 3 a side half court basketball: never seen it before. I don't like basketball.

I like Eddie, but I know a few people don't like him.
Bitter\_Concentrate.
Its a big job. So many events and different commentators.
Yeh mate practically gave you that one. It’s all true though. He sucks. Look into it or open your eyes 👀
