
I am not a spiritual bloke, not religious at all but Wolston Park gives off some serious negative energy. 

The first time I drove past the place I was just a kid and I still remember the chills I got because I had to ask my parents what the place was.

I remember seeing it again a few times in my teens in the mid-90’s, sometimes we’d go out there with a few mates, smoke bongs near by and just watch the place to scare ourselves until we couldn’t handle it any more.  It would have been terrifying to have been a patient.
It’s rebuilt into a rehab type facility and mostly only has forensic patients now… it has a fascinating- and horrid - history. The ABC did a podcast series on it which was very interesting. 

I’ve worked there and they have sections now - high secure, medium secure, and basically rehab where they can come and go during the day but have to be back at night. The previous patients mentioned in the story would never be admitted to The Park (former Wolston), they would be in mental health units at the hospitals. 

Some stories I’ve heard while working there:
- one of the admin building’s is haunted by a former nurse manager who hung herself / threw herself off the second level after being assaulted by a male colleague. 
- loooong time ago when it was mostly patients from Brisbane they would be sent down steam via boat, left at pier. Nurses were tasked with going down to pier a few times a day to move patients to buildings. This meant patients were left in the sun for ages. 
- as with all old school asylums often women were admitted by their abusive husband. For example if the husband had an affair and the wife became hysterical when she found out he could drop her off and she’d most likely never be released. Same with menopause / post partum symptoms. Wild. 
- some forensics patients are so violent they will never be released and they injure staff frequently despite nurses wearing armour-type protection. They are basically never let out of their unit/cell type spot and have their own little courtyard behind wire (I think it was also the ABC who did a story about one of the patients just recently about this).
Don't tell them about the past of that place!
Royal commission
Why is there a 100 year embargo on the records?

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-09/wolston-park-mental-hospital-abuse-allegations-investigation/104199734
Went home with a girl I've met on La Trobe uni  campus  one night. She  wanted to me to stop as close to Larundel Mental Asylum as I could for a make out sesh. This was around 8 pm on a cold, misty winter night. It was creepy as hell!
I drove through there accidentally recently, and it still gives off the same vibe. I noped out of there pretty quick, and still get a cold feeling thinking about it.
It is uncanny how some places give off distinct feelings.

When I lived in Perth’s northern suburbs I used to take my dogs for a run in the Gnangara pine plantation. One time I was at the edge, walking into sunlight and I suddenly felt really threatened. I left there and took the dogs home. After that I learned that’s where the Birnies took their victims.
Yes,

> "It's not fair how they got away with this crap."
I imagine it would be pretty costly

> The Wolston matter was excluded from 1999’s Forde inquiry in the abuse of children in Queensland institutions, and did not get a public airing in the current royal commission into institutional responses to child sexual abuse.

https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/oct/19/its-been-such-a-battle-wolston-park-survivors-win-shock-payouts
Costly in what way?
For the personalities involved. It’s good there’s going to be an enquiry,  (another one). 

That nurse’s account of her time there is damning.
These pictures

https://thebottomdrawerbook.com.au/2018/02/13/mental-asylum-mass-exhumations-and-missing-remains-the-tale-of-wolston-parks-lost-and-forgotten-patients/
