The price of my two favourites has doubled in the past 6months at my local. Curlywurlys now over 10c per gram!!
When Chomp bars came out in the late 70s they were 10c. Source: old bastard.
Used to be 50 cents for a curly wurly
Is this an inner city convenience store? If so, those prices are expected.
$1 at Coles and Woolies. Shop wisely.
You can get a box of 60 chomps on Amazon for $40.
Chocolate bars are 100% a scam now, whatever the retail price is, it's fake. They are ALWAYS 50%+ off. Typically just alternates every week or 2 between Mars and Nestle.
Haven’t had a curlywurly since I was at school in the 80’s. They were prob 10c back then. Thanks for the memories.
Saw some new chocolate bar that’s a wafer roll dipped in chocolate, but it was only 22g. For $2.20. 

100/kg for garbage chocolate. 

Haighs pastilles are cheaper than that.
Chomps at $2.25 should be an immediate execution. Last I bought one (which was last year tbf) it was for 50c - and this was in the Eastern Suburbs
40cents they were in 1999-2000
And only a dollar at Woolies.
So just stop going to a store that’s more than double the normal price hey.
What has our country come to?
Great. Now I have to go buy a Chomp bar.
Update: I received a response from the store owner who said Cadbury put the prices up by 97% on the 28th July.  And the store is absorbing more than 50% of the increase. They also said as no one is now buying them they'll likely disappear from the store.
Edens Sesame Bar still 90c
Just wait until you see the price of these at a cinema or airport.
Probably sound like a shit eater but for most of the main chocolate bars they tend to alternate being on sale for $1.00
I miss pollywaffles, not this new pollywaffle ball shit or the “great australian log”
I’ve found chomps on sale at BigW for 50c recently. Only ever buy then when it’s under $1
Curly Wurlys are literally 75 cents at Woolies sometimes. Don’t shop at independents when they’re three times the price
A Curly Wurly should be the size of a small ladder.
Tell him he’s dreaming.
2.25 for a chomp? The fuck outta here.
Chomp is 68c ea and CW is 57c ea  wholesale.
Chomps were still only 10-15c in the mid 90's
I have a “cherry ripe” bet with a guy from the office when our footy teams play each other… mine lost… so I went to shop today to get him his “reward”…. I had to buy two… one felt so small and cheap…. what happened to my boy…. he used to be a KING of chocolate bars.
I have stopped buying these shrinkflated BS snacks, they can sit on the shelves and rot.
The price of Cocoa has doubled from this time last year. It was actually triple earlier on this year, but has since come down.
shouldnt they be $1? :(
$2.25 for a CurlyWurly? What a pisstake. 

Admittedly the last time I purchased one was a cpl decades ago, but they were about 30-50c then. So, what, are they made with the pristine waters of Kona Nigari and hand curled and wurled by the Monks of Mount Athos now?
Chemist warehouse are a buck each
That's way too much for a Chomp. They'd probably be about a dollar cheaper at Woolies when not on "sale"
yummo love da chomp not the price 😆
That's what you get for shopping at IGA, they're worse than Colesworth and they started this shit first!
Lol remember them being 45c
Go to Coles or Woollies when they are on special. They’re still a massive rip-off but they’re cheaper than this. I think I paid 70c for a chomp from Woollies the other day.
I remember they used to have King Size bars. Then they all disappeared when everyone started getting upset about stuff being unhealthy around the turn of the century.
I'm glad they ruined the taste and quality before putting the price up, I was already not buying them anymore. Overpriced garbage.
And people still buy them. Insane.
More like the state of Australian subreddit. Little do these posters realise the more than are complaining about prices the more free advertising they are given to the companies.
I swear both of these bars have massively shrunk since pre Covid #shrinkflation
I kind of like that, makes me resist any temptation in buying them now. Been cutting out sugars like this for a while
Both 80c at Coles.

Tip: don't buy them at an IGA store.
Unaustralian!
Man, I remember when Chomps and Curly Wurlies were the povo option because your mum didn't give you enough change to buy a real chocolate bar.
I’d barely call those chocolate bars but yeah the prices are crazy.
Or you could go to a cheaper shop... Crazy idea I know.
When I was little, tim tams were sold individually and wrapped for 5c. They were called Zacs, a zac was what a sixpence, the pre-decimal 5c coin, used to be called.
My dentist loves these prices as I no longer eat chocolate bars or other sweets.
Wtf my local coles sells them usually at $1 each and it is not uncommon for them to be on sale for 80 cents each they are right next to my all time favourite the caramello koalas that are the same price
Just steel them
I bought one of those "single salami sticks" in the snack section on a whim this arvo to try for the first time, at a comparable price. Suffice to say I'll go for these at a similar price if held to an option :(
Curly wurly are $1 at the bottle o
I remember when curlywurlys were 10c *each*.  For the whole bar.  They were the only treat I could afford to give the kids each week for a looong time.
Your click bait is fucking pathetic
Imo it’s not expensive enough. Junk food should be a luxury
I wouldn't even eat a curlywurly or a chomp for free, let alone pay for the experience.
I remember them both being 15c in the early 80s. Source: old bastard as well.
(Redskins were 5c. Choo choos 10c and white knights 15c also)
Just checked how much 10c from 1975 cost in 2024 dollars, and it’s $0.85 cents. The supermarkets of modern times really trying to make money off us lol
Thank you old bastard
Chomps were always a go to when low on coin
And I could buy a litre of milk, a loaf of bread, and a newspaper for under a dollar. Source: fellow old geezer.
I bought some for my kids a couple months ago at Cole’s they were $1, 100% increase in that time. This is not inflation. This is corporate greed!
And 70c for chomp :(
And bigger
"metcash", so probably an IGA. I approve of the prices, it helps me *not* buy more chocolate.
It's IGA
63 chomp bars for $44.50.

https://www.confectioneryworld.com.au/cadbury-chomp-bars-63-x-30g-bars/
And occasionally on special for less again.
$70 for 126 (2boxes of 63 ) on CATCH 
Free shipping
Absolute legend 🙌
There’s just one problem with that,I wouldn’t be able to stop eating them lol
Cherry Ripes just had a shrinkflation episode. Saw them on special for $1 in Woollies the other day and thought I would grab a couple, when I grabbed one, the package was visibly shorter and it's now [44g](https://www.coles.com.au/product/cadbury-cherry-ripe-chocolate-bar-44g-7843880) instead of [52g](https://www.coles.com.au/product/cadbury-cherry-ripe-chocolate-bar-52g-136534)
And they had jokes
10c yes, Chomps were the same price.
They are still absolutely scrumptious
And it is garbage chocolate now. It doesn’t taste anything like it used to.
The duty free at Melbourne airport wanted $12 for a family pack of Tim Tams.
60 cents or nothing 

I remember when 7-11 did a free chomp with a slurpee
Is there an official pricelist somewhere? I'd love to go back to the store owner and call out his BS.
I'm sure these prices also went back down to reflect that /s
I am surprised you say that. I have the convenience of shopping where I can go from one supermarket really quickly. I do a quick scan of all there and most of the time IGA is cheaper on everything especially on fruit and veges. 

They also carry a whole range of oddball brands that are good quality, spices, nuts and many things. The seem to have specials on chocolate and popular snacks all the time. They are expensive for things like Vegemite and peanut butter because they cant  compete with volume on their buy prices. The freshness of the meat and chicken is great. The worst chicken is from Woolworths  and when they clear out wings and drumsticks its essentially off with a bad smell.  I wonder if people actually put their noses to the meats that they buy, you can smell whats off and whats fresh. Aldi chicken and meat is also  very good quality and its always fresh. Their Canstar rated meats are good. I have never bought off smelling wings or drumsticks from Aldi. I generally don't like Coles choices of meat cuts so cant comment.
They seem to all be colluding with each other.
Found the Metcash CEO's burner
Huh... What about this post is click bait?
So what do you consider luxury items like caviar and wagyu steak then???
You're right this crap should be taxed like cigarettes to pay for the health problems it causes. Sugar is an addictive drug, there's a reason confectionery is placed at the checkout counter.
Chomps were 35¢ in the 90s when I was buying them, Curly Wurlies probably 50.
Are white Knights those mint inside with choc outside? those were good if they're the ones I'm thinking about.
Chomp was a big deal when it launched because it was half the price of Mars bars etc. I think 10c was even printed on the packaging. Imagine that now.
Red skins were so good
Ohhh… and Big Charlie’s
And in 2024 dollars? Oh, you did mean 2024… :-(
I remember Chomps being 50c as a kid. Great value!
Well, I just impulse bought 126 Chomp bars at 5am...
$70 for two boxes on catch
Awesome gotta go get some!
That's an odd amount
~~Both currently 80c at coles~~
And then I must accept I am going to eat 60 chomp bars, possibly too quickly
Now the joke is of a very different kind
It depends entirely on who is their supplier. If they use someone like PFD they’re $1.30 each. I got my price from a small supplier with not as many overheads.
The inanity of yet another post complaining about prices, that does nothing but give advertising to the stores.
Healthy food should be cheap and subsidised and I’ll die on that hill. All those junk crap are highly unregulated anyway when considering it adds up to costing the medical system eventually.
Staples!
Yes! I LOVED THEM!
Collectors item!
9/10 dentists have entered the chat.
Can still get them but they aren’t the same
I’m so sorry I gave you a false sense of hope 😔😭
Sorry, the 85 cents was the 2024 dollars
That too
Put ‘em in the freezer. They’ll last longer.

Not expiry, I mean in your mouth.
You sir/mam, are a wise person...
Definitely too quickly
Nah just shows me where not to go. Unless it's that easy to advertise to you
Looks like there are a few shops selling "White Knight Bites"
I looked it up on Wikipedia - it's originally from South Africa.  
But there's this text: "During the 1970s Chomp bars were sold in Australia with the catchphrase "Ten cents never tasted so good". At one point, there is strawberry flavour available."
Ill have you know it saved a few trips to the dentist when it ripped out my baby teeth prematurely 
A dude at works wifey made us redskin slice. We all now have the diabetes. But we love her for it. Thank you, shitbeards wifey!!
<3
Curly Wurly is also a great freezer snack
I would hate to think how much pineapple lumps cost these days
Did I miss the strawberry one? Anybody else find one of those in the wild?! Nice research however!


CHOMP  
New Strawberry CHOMP  
New Strawberry CHOMP  
CHOMP CHOMP CHOMP  
Choose the Chomp that's right for you!



and yet, introduce yourself to me and I'll have forgotten your name by the end of the sentence.
Let’s not forget minties and fantails! 
I think those are still sold in small bags at supermarkets.
There was a mint chomp as well at one time
I vaguely recall them I think but it would have been way back when.
I don’t remember the yesterday land ago either
