Growing up I always heard stories about people finding money and keeping it. I've found the odd dollar in my couch but never money in the wild 🤣 If you do find money do you turn it into the police so they can buy lunch or can you keep it? 


This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Kinda sorta yeah...

There is something called "theft/larceny/stealing by finding"

You have to make reasonable efforts to find the owner. 

If it's $20 on the ground, reasonable efforts might be looking to see if there is somebody nearby, and asking them if they dropped something.

If it's $20,000 in a sack you need to make significant efforts - and probably need to hand it in to police as part of those efforts. Make sure you obtain a receipt... If the police don't find a legitimate owner you can claim it - and have a better than reasonable chance of getting it. 

https://www.gotocourt.com.au/criminal-law/nsw/stealing-by-finding/

https://www.acfl.com.au/larceny-by-finding/

https://corneyandlind.com.au/resource-hub/stealing-by-finding_criminal-law/
Closest I've came to finding big money was back when I was in high-school I found a ladies purse in the gutter and it had 2k cash in it. So I took 40 cents out of her change looked up her name in the phone book and rang her on the payphone . I told I used her 40 cents she met me at the shops about 20 minutes later looked through her purse and gave me 100 bucks for my honesty she was so appreciative apparently she was on her way to the bank to pay her mortgage. I felt like that 100 was like a million bucks hahahaha
I once found a $50 on the floor in Woolies. Handed it in to customer service and went back to shopping.
As I was checking out one of the team members came up to me and told me that they had spotted a woman(young mum) panicking when she went to pay.

That $50 had fallen out of her pocket and was the last of her money until her next pay.

Because I handed it in, it was able to be returned to her ensuring she and her kind wouldn't go hungry.
No idea if it's illegal but I imagine context matters immensely.

Find a stray $50 note on a footpath? Congratulations, you've scored a free lunch.

Find $50,000 in shrink wrapped $100 notes? I'd tell someone about that $40,000 you found. Someone is probably really missing that $30,000.
I don’t know about the legality of it, but I’d just follow my conscience.

If it’s obvious who it belongs to – say, money found down the back of the couch at your mate’s house, or a dropped wallet with photo ID in it – I’d return it or hand it in.

If it’s money dropped in the street and can’t be traced, there’s probably no harm in keeping it – but if that bothers you, you could always donate it.
Walked out of my house one day, and there was a flutter of $50 notes on the footpath, totalling $1400. 

Ended up taking it to the cop shop. They said I could be fairly confident that I would get it back as people rarely report lost cash, too hard to prove it is theirs, etc

6 months later $1400 landed in my bank account from vicpol 😃
I'm an Aussie, but have a nice story from Japan on such matters.

I knew this English guy who lived in Tokyo. Was fluent. One day he lost a roll of cash, a few hundred dollars equivalent. Just the notes, nothing to identify him.

Thought he'd try his luck at the local police station. They asked him where he lost it, denominations and how it was folded. And it was of course handed in and he got it back.
Short answer - yes. It’s not yours, you know it’s not yours and you intend to keep it from whoever it belongs to. 

If you turn it in to police, after a period of time if no-one claims it, it legally becomes yours.
I found an old school bank bag with about $2k in cash, cheques and various paper bank books in 1984.

16 yo at the time, handed it in to the police who traced the owners via the bank book info.

Turned out to be a week's takings for the owner's business, they were so grateful they bought me a $250 bike.
So, is this a way to do money laundering? Package the money in a distinctive way, “find“ it & hand it in. Claim it back, because no one else will know the way it was packaged.
I found $500 cash in a bank car park. Handed in to the bank who lodged with police. After 3 months it was mine. Empathy for the person who lost it should drive your motivation on what action to take.
If found heaps of cash over the yrs. 

2008 or so found $500 ( 5x100 ) at a bus stop. I was at school at the time, so I wrote a note to contact bus company and stuck it up in the bus stop, called the bus company and told them what happened, passed on my details incase anyone called, no one did. Waited a month and claimed it as mine.

Couple of years ago, found $300 or so walking up my drive way ( live in a 30+ unit building ). Thought someone dropped it walking home drunk, wrote a note in the lift. No one claimed it.

Walking a local bush walk, found $200 along the path. Picked it up and asked everyone I came across if they'd dropped anything, asked people parked. Nothing. Kept it.

Apart from that, found the odd Goldie on the ground
A couple of years ago, would have been around this time of year when it gets really windy in my area, I found $50 right outside my house! Then a few days later my dad found a list of takeaway food - like what you might give to your teenager to walk up the shops and grab it - and then I felt bad for them!
About 6 years ago, I found $70 in a Woolworths car park. I was so poor at the time, behind in all my bills, and I still took it into Woolies and handed it to the service desk so the it would be there if the loser called. All I could think of was how devastated I would be if I lost $70.
I found $700 and handed it into the police. They never found the owner so it was returned to me.
[https://www.armstronglegal.com.au/criminal-law/nsw/offences/larceny-by-finding/](https://www.armstronglegal.com.au/criminal-law/nsw/offences/larceny-by-finding/)

The above offence covers finding money. 

The key test is, *"The law expects the finder to make reasonable efforts to locate the owner before deciding to keep the property."*

So, to comply with this part you are supposed to take it to the police station and hand it in. 

If the owner does not claim the money within a period of time usually around 21 to 28 days, you can apply to claim the money as the finder. That's up to the discretion of the Commander at the police station, who usually will return the money to you, as they do not want to continue to store it. 

You are now legally absolved from breaking the law.
It is illegal in Australia. It's called stealing by finding (or something similar). You can look up that phrase and find your local laws for your state.
Coins go into the pockets (not including a schoolyard) notes get a proportion of effort related to the size of the note on finding the owner. Eg, 5 gets a whispered who lost this and 100 has me activey looking for someone missing it.

Large sums range from call the cops to run till your feet bleed then bury it and come back another day.
You’re supposed to make an effort to find the owner. What that effort needs to be is up to the courts. Having said that. Story time. My father, many years ago found a coworker’s pay envelope in the street. Three weeks of holiday pay in it. His name stamped on the outside.  He doesn’t know where the guy is. So he just hands it in to the cops. So they know full well who that money belonged to. He runs into the guy in the street a couple of days later. Pure chance. The guy seems kinda bummed out and my dad asks him what’s up. He explains the loss of his pay packet and holiday pay. My dad, not wanting to make a fuss, suggests he go see the cops. Someone might have handed it in. He laments that he has and they say nobody has handed anything in. “What? To hell with that! They sure as shit did get it, because I was the one who handed the packet into them”. So he marches down to the cop shop with the bloke and demands the envelope. Cops claim it fell behind the heater. But handed it over. This was more than fifty years ago now. My father was not a large man, but I suspect after his service in WW2 (he was born in 1915. I’m old and he started his family very late) modified his willingness to take shit from people, even cops was vastly reduced.
I once found $350 in pineapples, about $4 in shrapnel and a strange necklace on the bank of the river that ran alongside my workplace. It looked like it had been there a fair while.

The necklace was a mystery. It was a silver symbol, kind of like a candelabra blended with a crucifix. Our whole workplace thought it was some kind of cult shit. Our receptionist even had a theory about some interesting looking people that she saw harvesting plants along the bank of the creek one day. She wound herself real deep in to it and was very sure of her theory.

We ended up discovering reverse image search. It was a fucking Judas Priest necklace.

Asked around and kept the cash for a good while in case anybody came looking for it. Didn’t involve the pigs as they cannot be trusted here.

Nobody claimed. Fucking score. Spent it on a weekend away with my girlfriend. We tried Taco Bell for the first time. It was fucking horrible.
Found 3 $50 notes in the gutter earlier this year. Took them to the police station, got the money after a couple of months.
Yes if you find money send it to me for safekeeping
Found a purse containg a wodge of notes with no Id. Handed it in to the nearby copshop.
Called them a month later to learn it had been claimed by a pensioner who'd dropped it in the street.  

ed: I admit without that beaded purse I could have been sorely tempted.
My cousin and I found $600 as a kid. It was the 80s. We split it. My parents made me hand my $300 into the police. My cousin kept theirs. After a month nobody went to the police asking about any missing money so the police said I could keep it.
A guy i work with found a bumbag stuffed with like $18k with some glass pipes and unused zip locks. He assumed it was drug related, and took it to the cops. After a few months of no one claiming it they called him up and gave it to him. They agreed it was probably drug deal related but since no one came forward they let him keep it and the bumbag, not the pipes though
What money?
Just because the owner is unknown, doesn't mean the owner doesn't exist.

You can only keep it, once you have made fair effort to locate the owner. Bringing a $10 bill to a police station is wasting everybody's time. Bringing $1k to the police is a fair effort. You can go back and claim the money, after specific period of time, if the owner was not located.
Some jurisdictions have a crime called theft by finding. In these jurisdictions, if you find money in public, you're meant to surrender it to the police. If no-one claims it, it is usually returned to you.
It depends on the amount, where it is found, and did you make an effort to find the owner.
My understanding that in the history of money, no one has ever found money. It's either been handed in or it never got found... ;)
I found a $100 note once. That was nice
This is how I see things. If you find money, you keep it. Finders keepers. If you find a wallet or purse that happens to contain money, you hand it in.
When I was very young, probably around eight, I went with my older sister to visit a TAB for some reason.

While I was outside near the car waiting for her to place her bet, I found a wallet. It was empty. No cards, no cash.

She came back out and I told her about it, after asking if there was any money in it, she said I could keep it or bin it.

After getting home, I realised there was a pocket. Inside was $150.

I honestly told my older sister.

She kept it, and gave me $10.
Ok serious no cap, its illegal technically because its "unauthorized" because it constitutes 'stealing by finding'. 

But for a small sum, nobodies gonna bankrupt you. Just don't push your luck lol.
Money is property just like any other thing. Context matters somewhat but do you think if you found a diamond ring on the ground or a bike leaning against a wall you're allowed to just take it?
What money?
I work at a busy market and often find money that was dropped, not large but still money. I always hide the note and ask those around if they have dropped cash. I also tell the managers I have found some cash and without fail the scum always come and say yes I lost money but can never tell me how much. It pisses me off that everyday people will line up and have a crack at scamming it. Have had people turn up demanding the 100 dollars they dropped, when it was a tenner. I am 6'2 and a strong bloke and can tell a liar a mile off. Thr reaction is all telling. I have no problems telling someone to boot off. At times I have returned the money to those that lost it. 90% of the time the look on the person's eyes tells me they are bullshit artists. I make good money and if nobody can tell me where and how much I usually pass it on to a busker down on their luck. My missus hates it but its not mine. If it was a big sum I would hand it to the cops. Sad I know but karma is a bitch.
I frequently find money (no idea why) and it's often quite difficult to get people to give it back. I once found $500 outside a Westpac branch ATM early in the morning, before opening hours, as I was trudging into work. I called the branch manager later that day and said I have this money that belongs to one of your clients, here is where it was found and my contact details are work. Can you pull the ATM transaction list or cameras to find the client and tell them to collect it from [company where I work]?


Never heard anything back from them, after three months I used it to buy lunch for my coworkers.
technically any money found has to be turned over to the piggies,  if not claimed in a certain amount of time its yours 

How are you going to claim with evidence a $100 note
I turn it in. If it’s not claimed you may get it back. If it mattered enough to someone to go to the trouble of visiting the police in the hope it was found, they likely needed it more than I did.

And large amounts of money obviously you turn in. The last thing you want is some gangsta fuckers on your trail!
Trouser it, be quiet, get about your day.
I once found $50 on the floor on the sidewalk and handed it to the local police station. I kind of felt weird about keeping it but also felt handing it to the police was also pointless. They told me if no one claimed it, they could give it back to me but yeah, that never happened.
Yes, highly illegal. Send it to me and I'll do the right thing.
Just keep it
Finders keepers
Any decent amount will be assumed to be the proceeds of crime and the cops will keep it
I found a wallet at the 7-11 in Moorebank about a year ago, had about $80 in it, but nothing I could use to contact the owner so I gave it to the guy behind the counter. Pretty sure he just took the cash but I figured good karma for me though.
A lot depends on whether you have any chance of returning the money in person or if you have to hand it off to a third party to attempt the recovery. 

I found a wallet with over $1000 in it in cash, plus all the regular credit cards, etc. There were also two identical business cards. Who has two identical business cards but the person who owns the business? So I rang the company on the card, and was speaking to the wallet owner a few minutes later. 

Returned the lot. He didn’t even know he’d lost it.
If it is an amount that the owner cannot be identified like coins or low dollar amount then no but if you find say, $5000 in cash in a bag, then not many people would lose that and could be identified if they report to police. 

The charge is called "theft by find".  So "finders keepers" is not a law.

Also anything you hand into police that is not claimed in a certain timeframe is legally yours should you wish to claim it.
The law says that you need to take reasonable steps to find the owner, no where does it say that you need to hand it over to the police
I’ve always thought there were 4 kinds of people. I think about this all the time:
1. People who hand the $ in
2. People who hand the $ in if people are watching
3. People who hand in some of the $
4. People who keep it
Immoral
On a side note does anyone know what happens to lost money that's handed in? I handed in a wallet to the cop shop two months ago with a few hundred in it. I had to leave my details. Do the cops donate or keep it if money isn't collected??
Technically all money belongs to the government . I'd keep money i found  unless it was like a suitcase full in which case it might be proceeds from a robbery in which case I'd turn it in. It's never happened to me, but I've heard it no one claims it in 3 months you get to keep it but that may be a myth.
I briefly worked as a glassie at a pub in night-club district. Cleaning up after closing time, I found a $50 note. My co-workers said to keep it, it's what they did.
Money Laundering 101

Get paid by dead drop $100K

"Find" Money and take to Police get receipt.

No one claims "lost" money.

Make claim for the lost money. 

Profit successfully laundered.
If you ask someone if they dropped a $20, can't they just lie and get away with it.
Great comment with good sources too. Some fascinating real life examples too. 

6 weeks feels like a long time to wait for someone to Own up to $100k cash and I can’t be the only one who doesn’t trust the police to do the right thing?
I mean maybe aussie cops are built different, but in the US they would absolutely buy a new war machine with it before trying to find an owner or letting the finder reclaim it lol.
I have a vague recollection of newspaper reports about someone finding a barrel buried near central station in the 90s that had \~$400k in it, they handed it into police and eventually claimed it.
I heard a friend-of-a-friend story about someone who found $50 left in a Coles self-checkout. They looked around for whoever had used it before but couldn’t find anyone so kept it.

Apparently the woman who lost it returned shortly after and Coles checked the CCTV. The friend-of-a-friend was identified, intercepted and charged. Don’t know what the ultimate outcome was.
Yeah my baby niece found a wad of cash on the ground once  (I believe it was around $1000), so we turned it in to the police. Our biggest worry was that it was some poor hospitality worker's cash-in-hand wage (we were in front of a strip of restaurants), and really wanted the owner to find it. After a few years it remained unclaimed and the police contacted my sister to send it to her. Sweet bonus cash!
Money that people find at the ATM come with the benefit of a photo.
Good advice. The other important thing to remember is that if you found $20k cash, you may not want to keep money belonging to the type of people who handle that kind of cash. Imagine it was a dead drop, that someone else was supposed to pick up...and now they saw you walking away with it. Not good. Hand it to the police
I found an old iPhone and kept it for years then when I was about 14 a police officer asked me if I ever turned it in as lost and I said no I didn't even think of it then he arrested me this is when I learnt the police aren't actually your friends
Happy Cake Day.

Don't tell us how old you are. 40c for a phone call from a "pay phone"
Onya.
You're good people. 

I dropped $150 carelessly when I was in woolies once too. And was absolutely frantic when I realised I lost it. No one handed it in. Had a cry in the car and still think about it once in a while.
This is a good reminder for people - you might find $50 on the floor and think "Score!" and pocket it without thinking twice, but the result of this could mean someone goes without feeding their family.
You are a good person..


Fwiw I don't take random street money, not even coins, because a) I'm sure the next person who wanders past is more hard done than me (and also pride, as in, I wouldn't bother to bend down to pick up $1) and b) the owner may be a little old lady who needs the last of her pension money to keep the lights on.
And Woolies wouldn't lose that sale, bravo!
Also watch out for guys with weird haircuts and cattle-guns.
My thought when I heard people find money was like, what if it's fake notes and you get charged with possession or trying to use counterfeit notes.
Found a $50 on the train platform steps a while back, quick look around confirmed nobody actively looking for it, figured there was close to zero chance of finding/verifying the real owner.
I legitimately did find a $50 note on the ground a few weeks ago. It was an amazing surprise. No one else was in the vicinity at the time.
Got it. I think I’ll just find a $50 note 1000 times.
I feel like if I found $50k, I’d just use that money as my regular spending/bill money & whatever I got from work would just all go into savings. Live without a paper trail for a year, and at the end of it all, you’re up $50k.
Haha
That's a classic "do into others as you'd have them do to you" position and I like it. That's a good way to make your choices.
You’ve discovered a long term money laundering system
I immediately thought of Japan when I saw this post. It's probably the best argument for handing money in, because living in a society where you can expect people to do stuff like that is really nice.
I also have a similar story as an Aussie from Japan. Left my coin pouch at a claw machine in an arcade located in mall. I ran away excitedly after managing to win grab a plushie i wanted. Realized an hour later on the way back to my accommodation that i forgot it and bolted back to the arcade. I couldn't find it at the machine and decided to ask staff. They took me to the counter and pulled out a lost and found logbook and my coin pouch. I noticed they had even catalogued the exact amount/type of coins that were inside. After taking my details, I got it back.

Honestly expected it to be gone or all the coins taken, but was pleasantly surprised.

100% would lose things again in Japan.
I found a couple thousand yen (around $200 AUD) in an envelope under the TV when I was staying in a hotel in Japan. There was some squiggles written on it I couldn't read, so I handed it in to front desk.

  
Whenever I have found cash in Australia I just pocket it. Gotta respect the local culture haha.
Clever! Might look suspicious if you do it more than once though.
My first thought too!
You could almost give up your day job with the amount of money you are finding!


I've found nothing more than coins lol
I have this bizarre gift of just finding money in public. I’ve found weather-buried notes in gardens and coins dulled and driven on by thousands of cars on main roads and all sorts of random amounts of money everywhere. My favourite was a $20 note I saw at an empty bus station while I was on a bus that only came every 30 minutes, so of course, I got $20 and was late home by 30 minutes lol.

But these days I barely find anything. In the past month I’ve found $2.50, no free lunches anymore. Either people are far more careful with their money these days and aren’t dropping it, more people are poor and are picking up every cent they find, or cash is disappearing.

Or all three tbh.
Bad juju not to take reasonable steps to return cash. Creates a disruption in the good vibez in your life.


Do good and you will find good things happen to you.
I love this story. The taco bell part was my favourite.
They must’ve kept the pipes for themselves
I once found a $2 in a pay phone as a kid. I'm still in hiding  
Hi I work at westpac pls send me the money
In the 90s a couple of guys found almost half a million buried in barrels near Balaclava station. They handed it in to the police and after a certain time the cops had to give the money back to them. Although a few people came forward to claim it was theirs, none of them could prove ownership.

I always thought this was a great way to launder money. Make sure it doesn't have your prints or DNA on it, turn it in to the cops and get to legally keep it after 6 months or whatever the time limit is. You could only do this once, though.
I don't think there is any law that says you need to hand it over to the police, last I read the law it just said that you needed to take reasonable steps to find the owner
What’s a sidewalk?
This isn't America.
Of course he took it. He works for 7/11. With their record of wage theft, you probably made his week.
Go to copshop to collect the $100k in 3 months

Police says "Yeh nah it got claimed"

Cry
This method works exactly once per person
Wasn’t there a case in Melbourne where there was a story in the news about someone finding a huge wad of cash hidden underground in a pipe in an abandoned building? The police opened a big investigation into it because it was presumed to be drug money changing hands anonymously. 

Anyway another dude, a week later had a hunch that if there was one dead drop, there might be two. So he went to the building a week later and found a second huge wad of cash. Nothing came of the case, so he got to keep his portion, I think.
This won't work twice. 

Just buy a laundromat, like a *normal* person.
That's why they said to ask if they dropped "something." Just don't let on that it was $20, and they'll have no genuine idea what it is unless they actually did drop it.

That works unless they had no idea what they may have dropped, I guess.
Sometimes looking around is enough to find another person sad concerned looking at the grond looking for something.
Yeah. I found $50 left in a servo ATM and gave it to the guy at the counter. As if he, on minimum wage in the middle of a cost-of-living crisis, didn’t just pocket it. If he did I wouldn’t blame him.
Once it’s in the process in custody it’s highly unlikely that police would do anything dodgy. Trust the process and paper trail if you don’t think you can trust the police. Keep your receipts for proof.
Mate in the US cops take peoples houses and life savings thanks to “civil forfeiture” laws.
Us cops are by far the worst cops in the developed world.

Literally none are even close to it.
Reminds me of *No Country for Old Men*
Here's 40 cents. Tell someone who cares. 🤣
Way to miss the point.
Thanks friendo
Call it.
Never try to use it all at once. It looks suspicious if it’s $10000. To avoid possession charges, be smart and don’t stand out.

A good policy to follow is to report any large sum of money found. You may get to keep it all or a cut if nobody claims it. It’s safer as a policy to do that than deal with the risks of being caught.
Same as with any cash you receive, it would make sense to inspect it to see if it looks legit. Unlikely you would be prosecuted for accidental use of counterfeit money.
Take one of the notes to a bank, ask the teller if it's fake. Just make up a story that you got change at a market and not sure if you were scammed.
I always ask myself: "Do I need this $50 more than the next guy?" and the answer is always: "No."
Nitpick but "do unto others". Tho probably a typo so please ignore 🙂
haha seems like it hey!
not far from the truth haha 

it's been a while now since I've found anything good but. I must have been luckier in my younger yrs.
I think it's less people using cash. I used to get paid and take an amount of cash out and that's what I'd love off during the week, now it's just easier to tap ya phone and be done with it. Kinda miss having a pocket full of shrapnel but, came in handy for small purchases.
The Aussie outlaw spirit is alive and well!
Or less if a cop gets someone to 'claim' it on their behalf.
That may do the trick. Smart answer.
Even if you dropped 20, would you know if someone asked you did you drop something?
[deleted]
I remember picking up a wallet with a.few hundred dollars in it on the way to high school. Got to school and told the deputy head a I needed a few minutes off to take the wallet to the cop shop down the road. He said not to worry and he would take it in at lunch. I see him the next day and ask for the receipt, because it would be nice to get the money if unclaimed. His face fell and he stuttered out some excuse about forgetting it. 

Which is how I found out he was a thieving fucker.
> receipts

Wonderful things - paper trails, and records
I had a friend who was flatmates with a guy that sold weed. His dealer mate got raided and everything he and my mate owned was seized as "proceeds of crime"

He didn't own a car at the time, but they took literally every household item he owned and kept it. Cause he lived with a guy that sold 50 bags of weed.
Yea I'm not arguing just didn't know if that happened literally anywhere else. I don't think it does...
WA do the same

They haven't ever taken a bikies house though. It always seems to be an elderly person growing weed for medical reasons
Fuck I hope so. It's a godamned train wreck round here.
I’m old enough to remember that insult.
The reply my mates used was "But kid's helpline is free" :P
just go to the pachinko parlor every couple weeks.
May get more complicated if you had a whole suitcase of it that came into your possession through questionable means, however.
And you leave it on the ground and walk on? Madness.
“Tho”
The important point was (as u/allwrightythen95 says) "something"

But as a general life tip - most people aren't quick enough to lie convincingly in response to a question out of the blue
Just leave the money on the ground then. Trust the person who picks it up either lost it or needs it.

By taking it you remove the possibility it's returned to its owner. On top you're essentially spending part of the money based on your (well intentioned) judgement.

At some point in time you need to trust in other people. Just trust that whoever picks it up needs the full value, no reason to dictate how it should be spent. Unless you found the money in Gina Reinhardt's safe, in which case, sure, it's your moral imperative to move dat cash.
I’ve handed in wallets before and never got a receipt. They had cards in them though so identification. Might be a different story if it’s just a Velcro wallet with no cards.
Sounds about right. It's pretty disgusting here
There is a direct connection between education and shit police departments

Shit police departments get shit education/ training.
What would be the modern equivalent? Here's a wifi password.. Here's a link to tiktok..
It was from an RACV ad wasn't it?
your honour, I simply found it on the side of the road
Especially how they routinely set people up for jail by planting drugs.

 Their are numerous videos circulating of corrupt cops being filmed even inside of cars dropping illicit drugs. What a scary place it must be to live if you can go to jail for 10 years because a cop wants to set you up because he does not like your stereotype or face.

 I would be installing forensic level cameras in my car or property with such a corrupt system operating as routine.
Most police departments are County police rather than state police in the USA. Most civilised places would never allow the police to be operated by local councils/counties because the power just gets to their head like US policing.

 In the UK they use these so called "council security guards" that are like community low level police force in uniform. They have proven to be a big mistake because of the poorly educated people that they employ who let the power get to their heads while breaking the laws themselves trying to cover up their incompetence. There's numerous "police audit" videos that exposes this little Hitler syndrome in policing in the UK as well.
Agree. Also, all Americans get shit education, unless they can pay
Here’s TikTok. Go dance about it in your safe space.
A joke as old as payphones themselves..
Was it? It was just something we said to each other in the playground.
While that might ( and I emphasize might here) be a good way to deter that kinda police behavior, normal people can't afford that type of set up nor should that have to be the solution
If we are talking primary or high school, even then it's still shit. If we are talking uni, yeah that's fairly accurate.
Yea, across the board. Unless you can pay
