I've managed to extract it in chunks and have blitzed it back to its powdered form by using a mini food processor. How do I prevent it from solidifying again? I can already feel that it's going to revert to it's solid state.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Don't open it next to a steaming kettle

Use only the driest spoons

Or eat it faster
Cover it in chocolate and sell online. Home made OG Milo bars. 😜
Buy five dehumidifiers and have them running non-stop.

Keep all doors and windows closed.
*Pull it, twist it, bop it!*
Eat it from the tin on a regular basis so you use it before it has a change to solidify.
Use a more air-tight container next time you buy it. 

Better yet, use two. A large one for the contents of the can. That is only opened when you transfer some of the Milo to the smaller 'in-use' container that is used on a daily basis.

Every time you open the lid, moisture gets in. Reduce the exposure of your bulk Milo to moisture down to as little as possible.
Keep it dry. If it’s got moisture try putting it in a warm oven to dry it out.
Eat it as nuggets.  Or use it faster.

Happened all the time growing up in Cairns.  Not much else we could do most of the time.
Keep it in the freezer.
Milo sucks moisture out of the air and reacts with it to solidify (its hygoscopic).  Keep it dry as possible.
Keep it in the fridge once you've opened it.  Fridges have a built-in dehumidifier.
Put it through the Pacojet.
Dip the chunks inchocolate and make Milo bars
Mix rice in with it to absorb any moisture.

Pick the rice out though before adding to milk.
Yep. The wife decided to buy a refill packet but threw out the original tin. Used an old tea bag/sugar jar instead and well, the rest is history
Tried the oven on 60° for an hour

Turned it into a cake.
Is it cheaper than the desiccant I use for keeping my 3d printer filament dry, maybe a cheaper solution...
Moccona coffee jars seal very well. One big one to empty the can into. One smaller one for day-to-day use.

I do that for my coffee. Same problem as for Milo.
Moccona coffee jars seal very well. One big one to empty the can into. One smaller one for day-to-day use.

I do that for my coffee. Same problem as for Milo.
Excellent. Crush it and put it on your ice cream.
