My go-to burgers are the cheeseburger and big mac. Both come with onions and pickles, but my body doesn't tolerate onions very well so I always ask for "no onions". About 80% of the time the burger will also be missing pickles. McDonalds people - Why?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Odd, I have the opposite problem.   Five pickles in each cheeseburger, but no onion.
You can have mine. Just tell them I said so.
If I pay $58 for a burger I expect pickles.
I actually have the same problem with onions.. my solution is no onion extra pickles. 90% of the time, it works!
This seems really important.
 
You should write to your local MP about this.
How?? Every time I ask for NO pickles I get like 10 on my burger.  Most I've gotten on a big Mac was 12.   Grrrrr! I've taken them back and they claim I said extra, nice try when my receipt say NO pickles on it
I stopped ordering double quarter pounders because they almost always gave regular quarter pounders and I would have to sort it out at the counter every time.
I ask for no onion & extra pickles
You're gunna hate me but I worked at Maccas for 8 years up until 2015ish.

I tended to just not bother putting them on cheeseburgers for a few reasons

- Time pressure - getting a single pickle from the container costs time. When you're busy and managers are hating, gotta cut corners

- Cleanliness - pickles are wet. Most the other ingredients aren't. Grabbing pickles = wet fingers = wet food = more time spent changing gloves = more time being yelled at

- I don't like pickles myself. I was doing everybody out there a service by not including a pickle. I'd even argue that 20% of cheeseburgers generally had "No pickles" as a note/grill slip.

If you love your pickles just add extra when ordering. It's free and you'll get 3-5 instead of 1 or 2.
One crazy day I ordered the mega mac without onion. When I got home it was missing pickles. I'd had enough of this so I drove back, complained politely, repeated my order, and they made me a new one. I got into my car with it and checked. No pickles again! I went back in and talked with them again really confused. They clarified I wanted pickles. They made it again. I checked in my car, no pickles again! This time I got the manager involved who had no explanation but said he'd make it personally. The 4th burger finally had pickles.
[You forgot the Pickles](https://youtu.be/ezo0N8UHAk0?feature=shared)
URGH. I have the opposite problem with mayonnaise. 50% of the time my order with "no mayo" comes slathered with mayo.
I genuinely do not have food issues with any company the way I do with McDonald’s.

They consistently give me someone else’s order or fuck up what I have ordered with missing items or not following directions like ie no onion (just to give onion) or extra ingredient (just to not even give it).

And it’s not even isolated to one McDonald’s location, across the board it’s atrocious.

Not to mention even when all items are accounted for, they’re assembled like straight slop. 

And on top of everything, that pricing????

Stop supporting this trash so they’re forced to actually run a food service appropriately and properly. They won’t change unless we force them to.
People living in tents and this person is sooking about not getting pickles in their maccas burger. Truely first world problems
I used to work in McDonalds in the kitchen. Pickles are done in one stage then onions separately (on the grill). So why they’re missing is a mystery. As others have said, call your local member 😀
Pickles George
Yeah - I always ask for no pickles but still get them anyway most of the time.
Your real name isn't Karen is it?
Thanks for the honest reply, and the "I'm a teenager and hate pickles therefore nobody likes pickles" was my best guess.
Is that also why on regular burgers the 3 pickles are just stacked on top of each other in the “pickle quadrant” instead of distributed around the burger?
And there's potentially a genetic reason you don't like pickles.  Are you like me, who finds them REALLY bitter?  I mean "Would rather lick a Nintendo Switch cartridge than eat a pickle".  
Here's an article about it.  (and remember, pickles are pickled cucumber)  
https://academic.oup.com/jhered/article/104/1/134/771078
Ask for no onion, extra pickles
Might be easier to have your own supply of pickles.
How long ago was this? 10:1 and slivered onions were always done on the line for me along with all other ingredients.

Only seasoning was done on the grill.
Solid burn 10 years ago
A majority of the time they'd go on. It's just during really busy periods where you'd be like fuck it.

Don't think I ever skimped out on the Big Macs or Quarter Pounders though. Professionals have standards.
We used to drain the bags of pickles and do pickle juice shots because we obviously hated ourselves.
I was going to say use the app remove the onions and add extra pickles.  I don't like the pickles and ask for them to be removed.   I'm slowly learning how to use the app, and it seems to work well.
Interesting. 30 years ago 😆, the process has changed. Some nasty rehydrated onions were added on the grill, sounds like they’re adding real onions on the dressing table (I can’t remember the name).
Still kinda funny though. I used to have a pretty high error rate when it comes to ordering fast food, now I check everything before I leave instead of drowning out my tears with greasy food when I get home.
This is exactly it, or if you'd run out during busy periods the bag (was originally a huge bucket, super gross) was a pain in the ass to open and refill the pickle container with so you'd just not bother until it was dead quiet again.
Lol.... They don't actually read those
The cheeseburger onions are cooked on the grill with the meat again now, but that was a relatively recent change. They were on the line when I worked there 15-20 years ago
So… you are the Karen?
I seem to get the order I want.  I've order extra onions once and got extra onions.  If I don't ask for no pickles, I get pickles.
They definitely do. I like the filet-o-fish but don’t like getting the one filet-o-fish that’s been sitting under the heat lamps for fifteen minutes, so I always add a second slice of cheese to make sure I get one made fresh.
Nah, I try to avoid confrontation. I just wish bad things about people in my head.
Wait how does the cheese make sure you get it fresh? Is this some sort of life hack?
When Maccas used to have burgers ready made to throw in a bag, you could guarantee fresh by making an addition to your burger (eg add lettuce to a Quarter Pounder.)

These days I think most of the burger ingredients are pre-prepared, so any extras you ask for will be thrown onto the pre-cooked patty and over-steamed bun.
The items that are waiting to go are stock-standard. As soon as you ask for an item with alterations they have to whip one up fresh (although, as other commenters point out, it may be that the components have been sitting around being warmed for a while; still, I get parts of it fresher than otherwise...).
