
It'd be a shame if someone helpless were to suffer, wouldn't it Mr Bester?
Don't think this guy has ever shown any remorse. And the system has largely allowed him to get away with it
Oh good so he can't remember he's a rapist piece of s*** and she can never forget
Well, if his dementia is so progressed that he cannot be held accountable for his actions, I believe that appropriate steps to protect him need to be taken - evaluation for a care home, loss of driver's license, possibly a third party to manage his spending. I definitely think his independence should be called into question if he's capable of such horrible things but can't stand trial.
Thanks. The Mercury was reporting a clickbait headline and I didn’t want to give them the advertising dollars by opening it.

In this case, the headline tells me all I need to know
Let him serve a sentence and tell him it’s day one every day and see if he still has dementia.
Coward
This is the man who managed to get a PhD in his 60s ?
It’s alright mate, just stand trial and then you’ll forget about it anyways so it won’t matter!
Dont see how its relevant. Hes not denying he performed the acts. Still makes him guilty. Send him to a prison, then lock him in a medical ward for treatment.
I agree with him, let's dispense with trial and go right to prison.
I think he can get the care he needs… in prison
May he get everything he deserves 
Well he’s demented. 
Horrible little man - let’s hope the judge asks for evidence to support this claim and sentences him to appropriately.  
I am surprised he doesn’t have an acquired brain injury.
If he can argue he has dementia he doesn't have dementia.
*What about men’s health?* The system cares about men’s health.
Reddit's policies on condoning or encouraging violence prevent me from responding in the manner I may or may not desire to.
Fucking rockspider has been laughing about it. And Tasmanian law fucking protected him - the fact that she had to go to court to be allowed to stand up in public and say "yeah, I was the one who this bastard abused" is disgusting.
mate he was publicly GLOATING about it up until the release of her book at least.
The system allows most of them tog et away with it.

Yet if you name your abuser,  (or your relatives abuser) even if they were infact convicted - you can get charged more than the doggo pedo ever got sentenced to. Make it make sense.
All that's correct, but this is even further.

He harassed her online (relatively recently) and is claiming his dementia means he shouldn't stand trial. 

Unfortunately the dementia part might be true, but it doesn't change his horrific acts...
And preventing access to the internet.
Not sure about any actual violence, I just want him to “suffer” by standing trial even if that’s a hardship for him
While he was giving interviews to Bettina Arndt, Tame wasn’t even allowed to name herself. Fucking Arndt published her name and photo at a time when Tame was still legally prevented from doing the same. Such a fucking outrageous case, it’s disgusting that he didn’t serve much longer in prison, and that Arndt didn’t face legal punishment for publishing Tames details.
Why did he stop then?
Does this mean he should also lose his drivers licence immediately?
> While he was giving interviews to Bettina Arndt, Tame wasn’t even allowed to name herself. Fucking Arndt published her name and photo at a time when Tame was still legally prevented from doing the same. 

This is why we know about her. Her advocacy work about those shit laws
last time I heard about the prick.
and go into assisted living
Heavily assisted living with a nice jacket to match.

A child rapist with dementia is surely tOOo much of a risk to the community at large?

It's for his own safety.
How about we assist him in not living
Here thats called prison.
Diapers and daily enemas?
Kero bath and neglect but we can only
Hope
