
This country is very annoying:

"A company majority-owned by Qantas and Virgin has been in charge of deciding which carriers get access to limited and in-demand time slots at Sydney's Kingsford Smith gates."

FFS.

This is what happens when you privatise basic infrastructure.
Too little, too fucking late.

Qantas and Virgin should never have had a stake in the company which allocated how many gates they can use. 

Absolutely no chance of bias there, right? /s
Bring on the opening of Badgerys Creek. Qantas originally said they were totally uninterested in moving there, but you can bet your bottom dollar when its opened, they'll want to "own" all of that too.
Couldn't have done this before Rex got destroyed?

For a while they were openly selling tickets for flights they never intended to fly to that they could keep slots and make it harder for other airlines to enter the market.

Anyway, better late than never, maybe if the aviation market becomes a more level playing field Australia will get a strong third airline.
Australia, the land of the grift.
I feel like the real question is, if Qantas and Virgin control all the gate slots, how are they still constantly fucking delayed?
Our country really does nothing to stop these corporations from owning g absolutely everything.
It's straight up anticompetitive. The ACCC should have been able to force them to divest themselves of their holdings. Unfortunately, the ACCC doesn't have that power. Which is insane. If we're to have a "free market economy" (which we're constantly told is simply "the best"), then we absolutely need to ensure that the markets are competitive and that anticompetitive behaviour, or even the hint of it is stomped on very, very hard. 
This is what happens when you allow corporate and special interests to write the rules and “donate” to their sponsored politicians.

Wouldn’t it make it easier if all politicians had to wear a jacket when talking showing all their “sponsors”..

Certainly help people to decide who was actually talking
Ridiculous this was approved to begin with.
> This is what happens when you privatise basic infrastructure.

You say that in fristration as if the original decision was meant to benefit the public which it wasn’t.
Wow common sense its so rare lately my friend I forgot what it looked like almost
*After* they’ve already pushed out Bonza and bankrupted Rex.
Sorry, but I don't see how this airport helps at all. If I'm flying to Sydney for business, why would I want to commute a further 2 hours to the city?
Rex dying has absolutely nothing to do with slots.

Seven airframes doesn’t even get close to the scale of economies needed to compete with Qantas, Virgin and Jetstar on their primary route. They were taking a gamble that Virgin would go bankrupt and they’d be able to step in with all the regulatory approval already done. Virgin was days away from shutting doors in 2001, but Sept 11 pushed Ansett over the edge which allowed Virgin to remain in a similar gamble back then.

Rex’s gamble failed the second Bain bought Virgin. They tried to prop it up chasing FIFO work in WA but east coast was never going to work with such a small fleet. It needed someone else to collapse to survive.
Nah, Rex dying was the canary in the coal mine that got enough public interest in it for journos to open the can of worms.

And then in 6mths it'll be silence again, because nothing will have changed.
Various reasons, the biggest one in Sydney is that there's a cap on Arrivals/Departures per hour, once you hit that cap, everyone sits on the ground idling. Another large one is that due to the usually short turn times (30-45 minutes) for a 737 with either VA/QF, a storm in Brisbane, Wind in Melbourne, can cause knock on effects across the network for the rest of the day, both airlines try to keep "strategic spares" scattered across the network to then "step in" to cover a late arriving plane to get the next flight out on time, but then you have issues around if you have enough crews in said airport to shuffle one onto said plane.
Its this erroneous belief that 'the market' does everything best. The 'best' it does is exploit consumers.
Its also the politicians. 

Look how the Liberals played politics trying to wedge Labor with slots and allowing international airlines to fly on domestic routes. This  was supposed to be the "free market and libertarian" party that understands and is close to business. But what did they do? They played politics to keep a competitor out  that would have reduced prices. 

At the time Qatar airlines wanted to fly domestic and they would not let them. At that time Rex complained about the landing slots and their fair access to them. But what did the politicians do? Playing childish games for their own donors and ideology while screwing the flying public and entrenching a duopoly with favoritism. Again another example of the incompetence of our governance in Australia as well as ineffective competition policy that cannot be enforced by the ACCC. The ACCC should have gone in and busted open the landing slots issue a long time ago, however they are toothless tiger that is muted by the politicians.

Its such a hopelessness living in Australia with Australian governance being so incompetent at every opportunity. Is it a wonder  big multinationals dont want to come here and prefer just to set up base in SE Asia because of all the short term destructive thinking and actions by our stupid political parties.
The ACCC is a toothless institution and has been made like that due to political interest.
That’s the thing, the “free market” those clowns want specifically precludes government intervention or regulation of any kind.
Very disheartening.
Baffling.
You are mistaken.
Rex bankrupted themselves tbh
Bonza looked like a scam and Rex unwisely stepped into a space where it was much easier for Qantas and Virgin to crush them.


The rules changes will benefit future airlines, and Rex if it manages to survive. 
Slots wouldn’t have changed the demise of either of those entities
Sydney is gigantic and is quickly moving towards decentralisation with multiple CBDs. And it won’t be 2hrs. Even now it’s 35-40min by car from the site to the middle of Sydney’s main city, and that’s before the second airport’s freeway is open. 
This airport and it’s driverless metro line is helping future proof greater Sydney, and I’m all for it
People won't be just going to the CBD in the future. Business is moving out west, and will continue to do so in the future.

The Badgerys Creek Aerotropolis is planned to be Sydney's 3rd CBD (after Parramatta and Sydney City)

Instead of your business contacts coming into the CBD for meetings, you'll be meeting at their offices in the west.

It wouldn't be 2 hours anyway, its currently an hour by car, there are plenty of motorways into the city. You can easily take 30 minutes to get from Mascot to the CBD. If you are travelling to Parramatta today that'll only be closer to 30 minutes too.

Once the new motorways & rail links are complete it'll be even quicker to get around.
It can run 24/7 whereas current one has curfew
From the article it seems like Rex was trying to get more slots in Sydney but there weren't able to. At the very least it would have let them offer more frequencies or better times.

Yeah of course, Rex had a whole bunch of other issues, but more slots would have helped them.

Not to mention Bonza never flew to Sydney and they might have if they'd been able to get slots, of course they had their own numerous issues too tho
Definitely possible, I wish Singapore Airlines or something would start an Aussie subsidiary
Bonza wasn't a scam. They made the plan using smaller jets (E170s/190s) or turboprops (ATRs). 

The mistake they made was that they got a "good" deal with 777 Partners and it screwed them when 777 finally got to the found out stage of fycked around/find out.

If Bonza had stuck to their original plan, they would be still around and doing okay even without Sydney slots.
Complete coincidence this is coming out now then?
Sound in theory but who knows in practice.
A curfew that doesn’t really matter for business travellers.
They weren’t filling the seats they had, adding more capacity would have only caused them to lose more money.

Slots is a government created issue. We often have periods in Sydney where departures grind to a halt because we’ve hit the number of departures for the hour despite there being plenty of time for me.

The Qantas+Virgin having a share of the company allocating slots is historical and also created by the government. “We’ve restricted the number of departures so not to piss off our voters who bought under the flight path, work it out amongst yourselves.”
SQ actually did get involved in Tiger... and by that I mean the parent company /investment vehicle behind SQ & Scoot had a stake in Tiger ( alongside Virgin iirc)... but that went just as poorly.

It really is a duopoly.
> Bonza wasn't a scam.

No, but it looked like it. 

>If Bonza had stuck to their original plan, they would be still around and doing okay even without Sydney slots.

The original plan of "app only" to find flights and book/manage? And not have their flights aggregated anywhere except said app? Nah.
Rex was profitable pre covid. Covid hit, they were given hundreds of millions by their nationals mates in government and instead of bolstering their regional network, they made a bet virgin wouldn't find a buyer.

20 of their 50 saab 340s are currently without engines, the lack of saabs means they could have used those regional slots for their jets in Sydney. It also doesn't explain why their jets flew around with less than 100 passengers on average.

They also lacked 737 airframes to warrant more slots. 


I'm sure the current government has been working on this legislation for years, but now would be a time to leverage it with the rex demise, but they are not related.
Unless you’re on the red eye from Perth
Often more flights at better times can help the entire network. It would help them with connections, for example, if they had more flights between Melbourne and Sydney, they would be a better option between, say, Devonport and Sydney, which would help fill their Sydney flights. They would also be able to switch their schedule to offer flights at more popular times.

Yeah... the curfew in Sydney is also problematic. There a lot of problems indeed
That's a good point, although Tigerair had all kinds of issues, it feels like all the new startups other than the little regional ones are poorly managed
So them being able to land between 11pm and 6am makes it not a red eye?
Yep.

If I could arrive into Sydney around midnight, it means a 6pm departure, dinner on the plane and not needing to sleep before I get home. Way better than hanging around Perth until after 11pm then trying to sleep on a flight that only lasts 4 hours.
So you need an extra hour basically?
For that flight, it would be the sweet spot. There's plenty to other destinations that would arrive or (more likely) depart during the night. And that's before we talk about air freight.
Mainly international, yes. It will be interesting to see who elects to fly there.  

I can see an obvious domestic operation, freight as you say, and some lower cost airlines. Over time if transport connections are adequate, curfew restricted premium/full service airlines perhaps.
