
It's not tropical, it's just hot. Really hot.
Is it really contentious? They're just taking the piss
*It was minus three \[degrees\] here a couple of weeks ago. I'm sitting here with the heater on.*

Hahaha. Going for gold in tropical north Antarctica.
Sounds like something Morrison would've come up with.
Anyone - “Hello Mr Jacobson we were wondering if you would be interested in “
Shane Jacobson - “yes I’m in “ 
Anyone - “you didn’t let me finish “
Shane Jacobson - “I’ll still do it “
Maybe it’ll get all the grey nomads to fuck off out of Queensland back down to Victoria again.
I appoint it as a shit hole
It's dry as fuck, how could it be tropical?

Also, it's not in the tropics.
>The campaign is also copping flack about water safety for this still, which says "enter water at no risk".

What's "flack", the correct work is flak. Derived from German "FlaK" FliegerabwehrKanone (anti-aircraft gun).
Calm your tits, Julie.
'dura's gone troppo.
That's hilarious.
I like Mildura, especially food and Woodsies, but I suspect that Gondola on the Murray guy has some mafia mates.
>When asked if he thought it was important consumers were informed Mildura is not actually a tropical environment, Mr Alexander said "well, it just depends what you call tropical".  

Hahaha, I like this. Tropical is a state of mind!
I went to Palm Springs and made a “they should do this with Mildura” as a joke
And cold. Really cold (by Australian standards, at least).
No it's not. No one really thinks it's the tropics and everyone just understands it's a tourism campaign. 

But it's been effective to drum up media it seems.  Probably faked the controversy too.
Seriously, I think most of us enjoy some light hearted piss taking so I don't think it's that contentious. You need to have a massive stick up you ass to dislike this
You can keep my in-laws thanks.
Nah, just wait for the Wet and settle back to sweat it out.
Last time I was in Mildura I was crossing the road to buy a pie for lunch and a 10ish year old girl just shouted at me, "you've got a stupid haircut!" It was a school day. I was there for a funeral, I was wearing a tailored suit and had a fresh haircut that was just a normal short back and sides. To this day I don't think I have been more insecure about my appearance than when this young girl made fun of my perfectly fine, quite common hair cut.
[deleted]
I appoint you a bell-end
And it is realistic if there was viable housing. Just take Arizona in the USA for example. It has become a lifestyle retirement centre for the USA  and for many old people who dont want to go to a sticky/hot/humid place like Florida and places like Qld. 

Arizona has done some amazing things with environmental laws and building housing that fits in with the desert character of the state. They also have sensible laws like banning lawn and plants that are non native or anything that wastes water.. A lot people in Arizona also build adobe style clay houses which were copied from  the Mexican desert houses and that goes way back in their history.

Now Arizona is  booming state with retirees flocking there. If Mildura was smart and catered for a boom  with adequate infrastructure and standards it could well become a retirement capital of Australia.  Housing is going to be the issue.

I wont be hold my breath because councils and state governments here in Australia always screw up forward thinking and progressive alternative ideas. And just wait till the NIMBY's come out and then it will all die.

Australia  should split up some of the bigger states and make more states that give more free  and alternative thinking in a whole range of areas. This one size fits all city thinking with no imagination does not really work well especially with no real money being spent in the bush. Smaller states could better developed our large country and down the track they could be consolidated.
The image of the woman they've used to fake controversy looks like the kind of person who would be pissed off about something like this. It does feel a bit synthetic.
That haircut was heinous bro, stop kidding yourself 
Same here lol
Why’s that?
Not specifically referring to retirement housing, but general housing is HEAPS cheaper up there than in the southern half of the state!  So much more bang for your buck!
>with no real money being spent in the bush.

This might be a problem in Victoria, but not everywhere. In Queensland, regional areas in general have a far higher infrastructure spend per capita than SEQ, the main exception being Brisbane Inner City, which tops the per capita funding list.

https://queenslandeconomywatch.com/2021/06/30/brisbane-inner-city-and-qld-outback-get-highest-qld-govt-capital-spending-per-person/

Regional people will still complain they're missing out, though, simply because money spent over a large area with few people simply doesn't result in the standard of infrastructure available in more densely-populated areas.
Yeah, looks like ABC went looking for someone from Mildura who didn't like it
Maybe it was, we'll never know. I just feel like taking fashion advice from preteen, rural Australians who are actively skipping school with their parents consent is a bad idea.
This kid was good! I'm still getting roasted by strangers on the internet that didn't even see my haircut ten years later! I'm honestly happy to take it. She's probably a QC now.
