
Thank you 'Koala killer' Gladys and her spaghetti powered Italian mate, Bruz, who helped speed up the process. 

On the plus side, bruz got 10k in donations so it was totally worth it.
Just a reminder that the NSW Labor government went into the last election with a promise to create the Great Koala National Park on the mid north coast, which would protect 20% of NSW's remaining koalas, along with other endangered species like the greater glider, yellow-bellied glider and spotted quoll. 


They've yet to establish the park and refuse to suspend logging in the area. Forestry Corporation NSW is actively logging thousands of acres within the proposed boundary of the national park.


I don't have time to write a longer post at the moment, but here are some posts I shared last year about the issue, and it has yet to really improve.


Contact details for all the relevant ministers are in those posts - please spare some time to write to them and demand an end to native forest logging on behalf of our natives plants and animals who are unable to do so themselves.


https://www.reddit.com/r/sydney/comments/15e5pmc/the_nsw_labor_government_is_allowing_the/


https://www.reddit.com/r/sydney/comments/15kaeyv/update_the_nsw_labor_government_is_allowing_the/
Logging is a one way trip. Once they’ve taken the last tree they’ll complain about the lack of an industry and want retraining.
Still waiting on the Friendlyjordies video where he tears into Minns.
Increases extinction risks, yes. And for those non-human species too.

Nearly half of the world's forests have already been cleared or degraded for human use.

Imagine bacteria growing steadily in a bottle. They double in number every minute.
(Steady growth, by the way, implies a doubling every given period)

At 11:00 am there is one bacterium in the bottle. At 12:00 noon the bottle is full.

At what time was the bottle half full?

11:59 am.

If you were an average bacterium in the bottle, at what time would you first realise that you were running out of space?

at 11:55 am, the bottle was 96.875% empty.

Given steady growth in a finite environment, half of all the resources that were ever available are consumed in the final doubling period.

Nearly half of the world's forests have already been cleared or degraded for human use.
Why the fuck is timber so expensive if we are cutting down so much of it? I swear Hammerbarn wants a mortgage payment for a few sticks of timber for me to bang together and play carpenter, where is it all going?
Rip rip woodchip 😓
"It sped up our own extinction, but for a short time we made a killing on profits." Some Australian Politician in the future
We’re tearing all the forests down, and leave behind a barren ground.
I’ve spent so much time along the north and south coast of NSW growing up, both coastal and inland, and I never once saw a Koala in the wild.

I spent a few weeks in Adelaide and I saw about 50 koalas in my time there just 15 minutes outside of the city. Only place I’ve seen an echidna in the wild too.
What does Chris Minns do all day? I hear almost nothing but bad news about things over which I feel he should theoretically have control. The transport, housing, environment, etc. in NSW are a mess.
Stop the Ecocide!
And the joke is that they can quickly organise for the bush to be destroyed and logged but they cant seem to rush to approve the zoning and release of land for housing. 

 Corporate greed is always accommodated regardless of the destruction it causes but good governance like speeding up land release, faster zoning and planning laws relaxation takes decades. 

The corporate plutocracy in governance is alive and well. I guess they must want perfect storm sometime in the future like England when people get frustrated with incompetent  government that does nothing for decades for the people but hop to tune on a daily basis for corporate profits that destroys the environment while making peoples lives miserable.
Anger. Exploding!
NSW Greens should be all over this... but nah, inserting themselves into Middle Eastern politics is apparently their North star now
Yeah, thank god Labor is now fixing it hey?  Oh wait...
That’s fucking appalling.
Yup this is near me. They constantly get fines, but just do it again, and these are just the ones we KNOW about. There's shitloads they get away with, so I've been told.
Who is the current head of forestry NSW? i find we should name and shame the leaders personally
Lorax
# When the Last Tree Is Cut Down, the Last Fish Eaten, and the Last Stream Poisoned, Only Then Will We Realize That You Cannot Eat Money
Honestly think he should. We have been waiting on the Koala national park for some time.
Jordan is mainly a Labor shill, so you'll be waiting a while. 
Unless there are YT views in such a video.
I have no faith that we (humans) will do anything other than consume the planet, and leave a hell scape in it's place.

The irony of so many drawn to the mysteries of the universe, and whether there is any other life out there; when we have the most insane, rich, genetic diversity right here, and do nothing but crush it. For what, so that we can have billionaires playing space games, or buying football teams.

Humans are fucked.
What the market can bear and cost of convenience is just the beginning.
Sad how that song was written so long ago now, and yet things have not improved for our native wildlife
"I didn't know the knife we were slowly digging into our own backs would hurt this much!!! find out who's responsible for this!!!!!"
Barren ground would be preferable, we're leaving behind cattle farms.
Wait, so I'm not meant to be angry about things going extinct?
on the plus side, this is land now available for renewables as previously disturbed ground. Before it would have been land cleared for renewables.
Yeah because 1 year is enough time to regrow a Forrest! Great point! Maybe you can solve the homelessness problem with your great insight!
He won't. I tuned out from him over a year ago when it became clear he'd rather go after the Greens than a Labor government.
I swear there's a bunch of people on this sub that just immediately downvote everything people post or comment.
Nah - NSW government is absolutely letting the public down on this issue.


The time they've been in power is not long enough to regrow a forest, but it's plenty of time to conserve what forests we have and start restoring others. They've failed to do either, and they've allow private landholders and Forestry Corporation NSW to continue to log native forests, often illegally, with impunity.
Is 1 year enough to stop logging projects? To designate areas as protected? To increase the fines for breaching current protections high enough that they actually matter?
Yeah our local forestry is constantly cutting down super old trees in known Koala habitats, and 'protected' zones. They get fined, but they do it again and again without a care. These are just the ones we know about.

I can only imagine how many they are getting away with that don't get reported/fined.
You're right! They haven't been in power long enough to regrow a forest. And they also haven't been in power to correct years of bad policy. I'm in no way advocating for the Labor party, but seeing as the last party allowed corruption and often illegal activities to flourish, I take offence to dickheads blaming the current government for the mistakes of the past.
Minns is a part of the right-wing faction of ALP. He's been a union buster, and has lagged far behind climate action his entire career.   
  
  
  
I don't know why you'd think he'd go hard on climate action and chalk it up to "it's only been x amount of time," when he's a literal neoliberal.  



[https://jacobin.com/2023/04/chris-minns-nsw-australian-labor-party-hard-left-right-neoliberalism](https://jacobin.com/2023/04/chris-minns-nsw-australian-labor-party-hard-left-right-neoliberalism)

  
[https://australiainstitute.org.au/post/the-carbon-con-killing-koalas/](https://australiainstitute.org.au/post/the-carbon-con-killing-koalas/)
