
I grew up watching the Olympics in that 1980-1996 era where we just assumed we were crap and every win was a surprise. I still have that mindset, even though we tend to quickly jump up to the top-5 in the medal tally and hover around there for the whole event.
Just to check.  Has the # of events increased over the years?  (# of gold medals to be won)
We're definitely not going to top Tokyo are we? Where's another 8 golds coming from.
That's what about $500m annually gets you...
"The overall cost of our Olympic gold medals was in excess of $17 million per medal but that was thought to be not nearly enough investment by many who oversee our elite sports institutions," said Williamson, delivering the 2012 National Tertiary Education Union lecture in Fremantle.


https://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/they-kill-us-for-their-sport-williamson-laments-arts-funding-cuts-20121115-29ejt.html 


Not something I am proud of.
I almost preferred it. When the mens 4x100m freestyle relay team won that was a massive moment. Now if the swim team gets less than 5 gold medals we have a fucking national enquiry
Yes.

They didn’t have rock climbing or skateboarding until a few games ago
We currently have 12, good chance we get another gold from sailing. But I don't know the other sports well enough to guess.
Probably not. If the gold comes, there's probable medals in the boxing (2 chances - Charlie Senior and Caitlin Parker - I understand they're guaranteed a medal, with the colour being the big question), javelin throw (Kelsey Lee Barber medalled at Tokyo, and won the 2022 Commonwealth Games and World Championship), and surfing (Jack Robinson has to get past Gabriel Medina). There is also historical strength in the sailing and remaining cycling events. I'm not sure I'd write off the remaining kayak events, either. The women's hockey and both basketball teams are still live at the QF stage (amusing coincidence is that both basketball teams are playing Serbis in their next match).
And how many are employed for that amount? It's not like we're just buying a medal. There's entire industries and careers made for this.   

How many kids start playing sport and exercising because they are inspired by the Olympics?  

"Why as a society we think it's legitimate to spend huge amounts on our sportsmen and women, but seemingly don't think the relative pittance we spend on developing a potential Cate Blanchett or Geoffrey Rush is as justifiable, has to say something about our national and political priorities."

You picked an 11 year article that's more about the lack of arts funding than anything about sports. Wild.
they are about to add esport, this means nothing for us but a lot for china/kr/europeans
We're going to be lucky to get bronze in the basketball events, USA is taking gold in both.
Nina Kennedy is strong favourite for pole vault as well.
I think the thing that annoys people is when after the tax payer forks out for someone to play their sport they still come out and bitch at the country
What do you think invalidates the article by being 11 years old? You can do your own inflation indexing to figure it must be about $20m per gold medal now.  


> How many kids start playing sport and exercising because they are inspired by the Olympics?


 "the Sydney Olympics did not significantly increase physical activity levels in Australia"


https://theconversation.com/does-sports-participation-boom-during-or-before-or-after-the-olympics-227773
> And how many are employed for that amount? It's not like we're just buying a medal. There's entire industries and careers made for this.


There would be peripheral employment regardless of where the money is spent. There would be greater benefits for the country spending on education though or housing.


Bread & Circuses are what our politicians give us and we lap it up.
These aren't being "added" to the Summer Games. They're going to be a whole separate event.
So you're assuming that both the funding AND the amount of medals won is a constant that does not change?  

But the real problem is your main argument is fundamentally flawed. Who looks at it by funding per medals? Wouldn't it make more sense to look at it per athlete we send at the very least which even then doesn't make a huge amount of sense.  What about jobs created from this? Athletes, coaches, sports scientists, physics, trainers, money put into upgrading facilities that the public gets to take advantage of too that. 
Is this funding just for the summer olympics? Do these athletes not compete at other events? Winter Olympics? Paralympics? Commonwealth games? 

It's invalid because your entire argument is based on an 11 year old comment from a Melbourne playwright that had a go at sports funding BECAUSE of the lack of arts funding. The depth of this argument is "2012 sports Funding / 2012 Summer Olympics Medals won". That's literally it. The fact that it's 11 years old based on funding and medal count from over a decade ago just makes it even more absurd that you pulled up such a pointless quote.  Should we look at arts funding per oscars won? Of course not.

"the Sydney Olympics did not significantly increase physical activity levels in Australia"

You forgot the rest of that quote.  "the Sydney Olympics did not significantly increase physical activity levels in Australia"other big events have been more successful. The year after Australia hosted the 2003 Rugby World Cup, junior registrations increased by 20%.
More recently, female soccer registrations have significantly increased following the Matildas’ performance in the 2023 Women’s World Cup"
> So you're assuming that both the funding AND the amount of medals won is a constant that does not change? 


Am I really?  


It isn't up to me to give you the latest figures. I am not paid to comment here. I gave you *good enough* figures which indicate the obscene amount spent. 


 Spending more than Botswana doesn't fill me with pride when we win more medals.
