
I believe that's the point (sadly)
It's like Reynolds is trying to prove she's the person she claims Higgins defamation said she was.
restoring my character by \*checks notes\* suing a rape victim for defamation
So, she's concerned that the false allegations harmed her reputation?

I won't be surprised if she's vindicated with regards to these specific allegations in this trial.

But that won't improve her reputation. Most Australian's wouldn't know who the fuck she is. And a great deal of those who do think she's a gronk and that view doesn't depend on her handling of Brittany Higgins.
Anyone who thinks there was not pressure to protect the liberal party is a
Numpty


Just gonna be interesting what the actual evidence says....
That lying cow is wanting a pay day from Brittany.
It has been alleged that senator Reynolds is an oinking sporko who enjoys nothing more than wallowing in its own excrement. I don’t know for sure but it is plausible.
What a flog Reynolds is
This is Australia's government suppressing the speech of its citizens. It's fucking atrocious that our defamation laws enable this.
Must agree. I certainly am finding anything to do with this matter retraumatising!
> Senator Reynolds said the initial information she received did not indicate there had been a sexual assault.

And yet,

> Senator Reynolds went on to say she told Ms Higgins if she was concerned about anything she should reached out to the AFP or counselling services.
"I wasn't her counsellor...", what are you then if not a manager of people at the bare minimum? How can we trust her to represent people when she doesn't give a fuck about the people who are in her everyday life. Power-hungry blonde baboon, hope she gets forced into early retirement for this. [https://www.theguardian.com/law/article/2024/aug/09/linda-reynolds-brittany-higgins-defamation-trial-cross-examination-ntwnfb](https://www.theguardian.com/law/article/2024/aug/09/linda-reynolds-brittany-higgins-defamation-trial-cross-examination-ntwnfb)
They are, all of them, the same.
Perfidious bovine harms own reputation.
What a monumental waste of tax payer money.
Yep in my opinion, Reynolds is a horrible human.
For me this is worse than the original situation.   The criminal court already ruled that Higgins shouldn't have to endure anymore and yet Reynolds decided she's going to get her pound of flesh.
I wouldn't be surprised if the court was like 'ok the tweets were possibly defamatory however there are no damages since you pushed for a trial instead of accepting mediation which was ordered by the court and Higgins still gets to keep her trust.' 
I don't know what payday she expects. It will all go in lawyer fees
Stop defaming the lying cow
Did you mean to quote the same thing twice?
**This**. This is exactly it. She basically just told her if she's concerned about anything, she should reach out to AFP or counselling services. Basically refused to support her and passed the buck.

Senator Reynolds has her pants on fire 🔥
So she’s an unsympathetic boss? Not seeing evidence of a cover-up (based on what Higgins’ lawyer presented today, anyway)
There was no cover up, someone told me it didn't happen.
So according to your link,

> Young also showed court notes from AFP assistant commissioner, Leanne Close, written on 4 April 2019 during a meeting with Reynolds and her then chief of staff, Fiona Brown.

Ms Reynolds contradicts the notes -

> Reynolds told the court on Friday said she did not point to the couch because she was not yet aware of the sexual assault allegation.

>Reynolds also said the notes were incomplete and were just “four points of abbreviation of a longer conversation”.
Absolutely, no one came out clean. 

It's always been about money or ego with them all.
Well, she is a member of the Liberal Party. It rather goes without saying these days. That she was a Young Liberal is just that extra bit of icing on that particular cake. 
That sort of language is uncalled for. Please address Reynolds using language more befitting a woman who has given so little and taken so much from Australians, especially Higgins. The language you are looking for is “a raging cunt”.
Well we knew that she was a mean spirited " lying cow" by all accounts. Can you really expect any better with such bitter ideology and victim blaming. Much like the case of CP the alleged anal rapist, blame the victim while trying to taint their opposition. The Sky New defence of these grubs is a damning indictment of their guilt and scum-thuggery
uhhhhh no, the criminal court didn't rule anything because the trial aborted.
Yeah this is what I don’t get, they abandoned a trial against a rapist bc they seemed Brittany to fragile to go through the trial but then they allow this to go ahead when it’s still dragging Brittany through all the exact same details and is as re-traumatising as continuing with the BL trial would’ve been…. Like to me, this entire thing has sent me loud blaring message to rape survivors to stay silent and not come forward and the fact that cow Reynolds would damage not only Brittany but ostensibly all victims of rape for her pound of flesh tells me everything I need to know. Win or lose her reputation is what it deserves to be, someone who gives zero fucks about abused women. 

Also just a caveat, she thought the compensation BH got was unfair. That’s pretty much why she’s going after her, she thinks this rape victim was given too much money. It’s actually got fuck all to do with her, it’s pure rich woman jealousy that someone got money she didn’t get and she wants some money to. Actual vile human.
There was no mediation?


I thought that was a requirement before going to trial? And if it was ordered by the court, how is she able to disregard it?
And given that point, what the hell is the point of a Liberal Party politician suing anyone for defamation? It's not like their reputation can be tarnished any more than it already is.....
But it opens doors. Other avenues of potential income that bed partners Reynolds and LNP will manipulate, exploit and bleed dry.
Darn, thanks.
I think refusing to acknowledge it happened, passing the buck onto someone else, and then steam cleaning any evidence is not a cover up. It's just how liberal parties deal with being raped. The idea is you keep quiet. Brittany broke those rules. She has to be punished. I don't make thw rules. It's just how the liberal party works.
“Ms Reynolds contradicts the notes”. In other words Ms Reynolds is a habitual liar trying to get out of a sticky position
She lacks the warmth or depth to be a cunt.
I came here to say this
Ruling is perhaps a poor choice of language.  The case is not being retired due to concerns for Higgins mental state.
Yes clearly Reynolds had no intention of accepting mediation. They had some hearings but she was the one pushing for court. 
I mean, you can go to mediation and stonewall, the court can't force you to accept a proposal. But if they reckon you're not doing it in good faith that's going to reflect poorly going forward.
Vindictiveness and spite. The idea is to make an example of people who cross them. 
