From the Rats of Tobruk association:

“VALE Australia’s Last Rat of Tobruk

It is with great sadness that the Rats of Tobruk Association inform you of the passing of the last Australian Rat of Tobruk Thomas Page Pritchard at the age of 102 on August 3rd.

Tommy was a stalwart member of our association and a most humble veteran, having served with the 2/5th field ambulance throughout the middle east and the southwest pacific.

We as an Association are extremely grateful to have had Tommy for so long yet we mourn his loss and the last direct linkage with some 14,000 Australian servicemen who served in Tobruk. 

As per Tommy’s request a private family funeral will be held, but a public memorial for all Rats of Tobruk will take place in Melbourne at a date to be advised.

A condolence book will be made available at Tobruk House for members to sign soon and other ways for members to pay their respects will be announced in due course. 

Attached with this message is a portrait of Tommy done by artist Peter Wegner in August 2023.”
Imagine being the last alive of 14,000 soldiers. RIP Tommy.
Had the pleasure of speaking with a Rat of Tobruk a few years back (who is now dead, Mr. Gordon Wallace, you can google him) and he told me that every few years there's a headline saying that the last Rat has died, but one extra always come crawling out of the woodwork somehow
I remember coming across these blokes in the 80’s as a kid at the Dee Why RSL (when RSLs were still proper RSLs).  My Grandmother, then a widow would take me there frequently when I visited Sydney annually from rural QLD.  Sadly my grandfather passed away when I was really young, did his time on radar in Papua New Guinea, his brother was killed in that conflict.

Use to love hearing their times within the military then, such a different time then.

Now I’ve done my time as a digger in the ADF, and on the flip side becoming old myself…sad to think they’re all gone now.

Lest we forget
My Pop was a Rat of Tobruk. He passed back in 2002.  RIP. A very special group of diggers and it’s sad there are no more to tell their stories.
It’s sad that we’re losing the last of those who can recount the true first-hand horrors of a global war, right at a time when it feels like the world is most in need of listening to those stories and avoiding those same mistakes.
Thank you Sir   RIP
Ode of Remembrance

    They shall grow not old,
    as we that are left grow old;
    Age shall not weary them,
    nor the years condemn.
    At the going down of the sun
    and in the morning
    We will remember them.

    Response:

    We will remember them
    Lest we forget
My grandfather was a Rat of Tobruk. He served in an anti-Tank regiment.  After the war finished in Europe, he served in the Pacific. 

We used to go to his bitallion reunion every ANZAC day and it was hard to watch the group get smaller and smaller every year.  Every time we would go back it was like "I wonder who will be here this time".

I'll be there in Melbourne.
On ya, digger. Rest now mate.
I'm not an advocate of glorifying war, but there is a supposed quote by German general Rommel the desert Fox, which goes something like : "if I had to attack Hell, I would use Australian troops, and if I had to hold it I would use New Zealanders".

Not sure if it's a  true quote, or just a myth though. 

Regardless:

Vale
The End of an Era, We will never forget the bravery and legacy of the Rats of Tobruk.
My first thought seeing this pic, was “Bud Tingwell was a Rat of Tobrook?!?”
My dad was a medical officer at Tobruk, wounded and disabled for life at El Alamein
Rest well, mate
I remember meeting a former Rat of Tobruk in Ravenshoe, Queensland. His name was Bud and had the world’s best oranges growing on his tree. A friend of mine back then who is a war historian documented hours of conversations with him.
My wife's uncle was also a Rat of Tobruk.

They fought hard and held their position (only for the English to lose it later, but that's a story for another day).  A lot of them also went on to Kokoda and defended our country.

RIP digger.
My grandad was a Rat of Tobruk, he was an artillery gunner. He died of lung cancer nearly 40 years ago (before I was born) and was (I believe) technically considered a war fatality. Soldiers were almost forced to smoke, so the cancer was considered a result of that. 

My Grandmother had a war widow health card for the rest of her life, top care from the Government!
I went to the funeral of Bob Semple a couple of years ago, he was 99 years old and until the very end would push his neighbours bins in once the truck had passed. They closed Russell Street in the Melbourne CBD with a marching group of bag pipers and I have never felt such a chill in my spine. May this man RIP and always be remembered for his sacrifices. ❤️
RIP , lest we forget.
Rip, there’s a dedicated area at the Heidelberg repat hospital about the rats of Tobruk that I often go look at,I guess it’ll be a little different next time.
A colleague from an old place I used to work out was family friends with one of the Rats Of Tobruk. Apprently this fella was at the doctors one day, and the Doc said to him: 'I hope you're not drinking more than a few middies a day' whereas the Anzac replied 'I spill more than that'
God bless him
Rest easy, digger. Your duty is done.
Rommel, Screw that guy. Legends to a man. RIP digger
My Pa was a rat of Tobruk, also a Tommy, we lost him in 2007. Was far too young to hear about his experiences which he only ever talked about once after the war. Rest In Peace.
Looking at Australia's involvement in conflict on the international stage, most of the significant wars did not require Australia's participation and were a waste of life...

WW2 was *not* one of those times. Australia had real stakes to lose if Axis emerged victorious, and could be a vastly different country today if history had turned that way.

Before my time. But i salute you nonetheless 🫡

Thank you for standing when it really mattered. Godspeed.
Much respect
RIP Digger. 

May the world never repeat the horrors you endured for us...
Rest easy, digger.
If anyone else was curious about Tobruk: [YouTube link](https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=SmD9poGFQ44)

[Australian War Memorial](https://www.awm.gov.au/visit/exhibitions/tobruk)
May he and all the other Rats of Tobruk who fell in battle and passed away rest in peace. They were defending our futures when they stood against the evil of Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy.
🫡 Thank You for your service Sir
My grandfather was a Rat of Tobruk.
RIP old mate…
Rest In Peace Digger. 

This is a sad reminder that Time takes no prisoners. And with the passing of these last Veterans, their memories of the deadliest conflict in history are now passing into history.
Hero! RIP!

There’s chunks of rock from the Tobruk rat fort at the North Bondi RSL… it’s known as “The Rats”
My pop was a Rats of Tobruk, always was proud of the battle he survived. RIP Tommy.
R.I.P. old digger. What an incredible innings you had.

Not to overshadow the original message, but if you know a veteran, please take a moment to text or call them today to show you care. I have a friend who’s a Vietnam Vet, still grappling with the loss of his comrades. Another friend, just 40 years old, served in Afghanistan and faces daily struggles.

It’s such a simple act, but it can make all the difference. Hearing the voice of someone who cares, reaching out with love, can have a hugely positive effect.
My great grandfather was a rat, 2/13th "the devils own", along with his younger brother. It makes me proud to march wearing his medals every ANZAC day. I still have all the letters he sent home, and the gifts he gave my grandfather and great auntie. 

We've lost the last of an incredible group of men.

Lest we forget
[deleted]
My Pop (Grandfather) was a Rat of Tobruk. He got through the war mostly unscathed except for a finger that got shot off. RIP Tommy, and to you Pop.
RIP sir.
RIP
Lest we forget and rest in peace
God bless, may he Rest In Peace.
Legend, survived that hell and had a very good innings afterwards.
Rest easy sir
He may have passed and now joins his fellow brothers in arms. But his memory will never be forgotten. The spirit of the Rats will always live on in the generations of families to come. Lest we forget.
He served his country and the commonwealth well.
May he rest in peace.
You can finally rest digger.
The passing of the last Australian Rat of Tobruk is a significant moment. These brave soldiers played a crucial role in history. May he rest in peace.
God bless you, rest in peace
Thank you. RIP.
Thankyou, you and all those who served will always be remembered
Legendary
Vale
My grandmother lost two brothers in Tobruk.
Hero
RIP Sir.
Vale.
Vale
R.I.P with the up most respect , my great uncle was in there with you , he was a rat to , may they all rest easy 🙏
Vale dear brave Hero. Thank you for your service. Rest In Peace 🦋✨🇦🇺
My grandad was in the 2/28th, would have been 124 this year! Survived North Africa but killed at the Busu River crossing in PNG.
Good morning! I cannot fall into a rabbit hole today so can someone give me a quick explanation of this group? If I start googling, next things I know it will be lunch time!
Thanks for sharing this, I'd never heard of the rats of toburk till this post, you've lead me and many others to explore and learn about them from this post. rip legend.
Bloody Australian Legend!!
Thanks mate
Even the grim reaper hesitated a long while before approaching him.
From a former US Navy Officer, total respect for this amazing warrior and hero.  RIP Mr. Pritchard, the world needs more men like you - strong, fearless and just.
Why were they called 'Rats'? Is it something similar to Vietnam tunnel rats?
My great grandfather was one of the Rats of Tobruk. I loved listening to his war stories, he was an incredible man.
Rest in piece. 

Historically, how important was holding out in Tobruk in the grand scheme of the war? Would the Axis have taken over Africa and would it have changed future events of the war?
My great grandpa Ernie/mick Evans was a Rat, he passed around 2002 when I was about 11. Never got to hear him tell his story but he wrote a memoir detailing some pretty crazy stuff
My school principal was an ex Rat.
Used to give us boys shoe inspections regularly.
Hard but fair.
RIP Spud.
His service record very clearly gives his birthdate as 1919 but everything ive read says he was born in 1921 so he must have raised his age to get in.
In 1968 I worked with a guy who I later found out had won a MM at El Alamein. Turned out he saved another former "Rat" that my Mum knew. RIP Athol and all fellow Rats
I have nothing else to add except respect to this gentleman. He and his are resting now, may god bless them with the peace they so greatly deserve.
He outlived my dad, who used to tell me stories of the rats of Tobruk
Lest We Forget
Gee, I'm feeling old now.

Back in the 90s every second old bloke in my hospital was a WW2 vet of some kind.

I'd always chat to any that wanted to. Fascinating stories.

Remember the fella telling me about being dive bombed in the western desert by stukas (coming right for you) or the old artillery man telling me about the barrage at the beginning of the second battle of El Alamein...."lit up the sky"...old George, deaf as a post.

Vale, those chaps
They must make a quality movie about them
Lest we forget.
As an American... I have no idea who this is.

As a veteran, I salute this man, and thank him for the service he provided to Australia and all allies during those times of hell.

I just watched a bit on WWII vets that aired during the Olympics, and it was a tear jerker for sure.  These men and women won't be with us for long.

Thank you, sir.
My late nonno was a private in the Italian army, captured at the Battle of Tobruk by the Aussies. He would have been 104 today. It's quite sad knowing now that they're all gone.
Wherever he is, I hope it's peaceful.
We will remember them
Lest we forget
Till Valhalla. Hope he sees his boys again in the desert
When I was in army cadets took part in a guard of honour for the rats on what was probably Anzac day.

It was at a time when I was intensly interested in WW2 history. One of my favourite memories
We WILL remember them..
My great uncle was in the Rats of Tobruk. He passed away a few years ago now. He was a good man.
So sad, but he had a long life! RIP Sir
I hope he meets his comrades in arms in the afterlife!
Thank you for your service and rest in peace🫡
May he rest in peace. I wonder if he ever met my grandfather a fellow rat only brittish. And I was born Aussie. My grandad loved the Aussies.
Respect.
🫡
A true hero and icon of Australia.
Respect
Certified, fair dinkum legends, all of them. Rest easy, for it is well-deserved.
Two thumbs up to Tommy!

Many many families will mourn the loss.
R.I.P.  sir.
RIP,  Thank you.
Rest well sir
Thank you Sir, rest peacefully.
Rip sir.
RIP digger
His greatest history will remained.
RIP, Digger. Sorry we couldn't stay out of more wars as we promised you and your mates.
I remember meeting a few of these lads when they came for a talk back when I was at high school many moons ago. They told some pretty interesting stories.
RIP
vale to you sir thank you for your service
🙏
Rip:(
Reunited with your comrades in heaven:)
Much respect o7 they have a club house I walk past often and a plaque


They don't make men of this quality anymore
Many years ago I volunteered as a driver for Anzac Day.  I had the honour of transporting one of the “rats” in the march.  He carried himself with such dignity.
Grandfather in law whom I never met was a rat of Tobruk. Escaped the nazis in Poland linked up with the British then the aussies fought all over the place and survived only to be hit by a truck on night back in Australia.
My great uncle was one of the Rats of Tobruk. Fought in PNG including Buna-Gona after being rotated back to Australia.
May you rest in peace, and thank you for your service. Lest We Forget.
Aww, my dad was a Rat who lied about his age to enlist young like so many others. Can’t believe there was one left. Respect.
Vale. ❤️
Rest in peace, you've earned it.
RIP Thomas. Thank you for protecting us over the last century. Have fun with your mates up there!
🫡
Thanks mate

RIP
Thank YOU sir. RIP.
Thank you.
My grand dad was 2/1st Pioneers, fought all through North Africa, Tobruk, Benghazi, El Alemain, fought the Japs in New Guinea, first Xmas home in 6 years he was killed an a car accident when his drunk cousin decided to race a train across a level crossing, cousin lived, Grand dad left behind 14 kids. Life is a funny thing.
Lest we forget.
Lest we Forget
Lest We Forget
I thank him for his service.
Replace that guy with 4 essays with machetes and that is modern Australian culture now.
RIP. Sorry our govt has turned the country for fought and sacrificed into an over priced multicultural cesspool.
[deleted]
Is he the guy from the if ___ were honest youtube video series?
He died the night before the entire global economy crashed, thank goodness.
Waiting for Soros to join the list.🤞
Emu war
Is it like the Emu War?
Queueing for an Ice Cream

although he didn’t smoke, grandad never went anywhere  
without the old tobacco tin in his pocket
  
one day me and my brother asked him what he kept in it  
some sand, grandad said  

why do you keep some sand in a tobacco tin, we asked  
where else would I keep it, he said  

but why keep sand _at all_, we asked  
it’s special sand, grandad said, it’s come all the way from France  

we peered into his tin and stared for a while  
French sand didn’t look very special, it looked like ordinary sand to us  

why’s it so special, we asked  
each grain represents an old friend of mine, he said  

grandad must have had a lot of friends, we thought  
did you go to the beach with them when you were a boy, we asked  

yes, something like that, grandad said, snapping the lid shut,  
asking the man for three 99s, two with red sauce

Brian Bilston.
It does illustrate well the odds of making it to a 100.
Dude won life battle royale
That tantine must have made him a billionaire
This happens because there are (were?) umpteen different associations measuring and announcing different passings. So you might get the last infantry guy passing away, or the last guy from 2/13th or whatever. Old mate above was an ambulance driver, so different kettle again.

TBH I am surprised to find that there was anybody from that early on in the war still around. But on the [nominal roll](https://nominal-rolls.dva.gov.au/veteran?id=435422&c=WW2) it says that his DOB is 25/5/1919. So that would make him 105, not 102.
Truly Rats, then. Great moniker, its really difficult to get rid of rats
To be fair, there is a good chance that this gentleman really is the last
I had a great conversation with an old North Africa campaign artilleryman on the Melbourne to Warrnambool train a few years back. Said that they camped out with their artillery one night, but nobody came to see them in the morning, for whatever reason they had no radio or it wasn't working. They sent out a couple of scouts who quickly came back to camp and told everyone they had to pack up shop immediately - the front lines had changed several kilometres overnight and they were now behind Axis lines. Said it was the most frightened he'd been during his entire service. Wish I could've recorded the conversation, but it seemed rude to ask.
That made me laugh.   Very appropriate for the “Rats”.
I still go to Dee Why RSL and every night in the dining area they still have one minute silence
I grew up in a little bush town with a high ratio of vets. Our RSL was an old tin barracks shed, wooden floor and seats around the edge, a billards table, a small indoor lawn bowls bit off to the side and a small bar - run by whichever old bloke happened to be there that day. Flags and old pictures on the wall. 

My old man would drop in time to time to have a yarn and a beer with the blokes.

Too me that will always be what an RSL is. I wasn't until I'd been in the city a couple years that a mate suggested we go to the RSL for a feed. I asked him twice to make sure I heard him right - seemed like a strange suggestion. When we got inside I still wasn't sure if we were talking about the same type of place - just seemed like a swanky bar/restaurant with no connection with what I grew up with. 

Had a double take at the radio the other day on the way to work - a RSL near me was advertising after their recent reno - telling me to come down and "have a focaccia in the Suvla Bay Cafe". The fucking Suvla Bay Cafe. There isn't a chance in hell they would have called it that 30 years ago.
I was a barman at the Dee Why RSL once upon a time.
Lest we forget
My pop too, but gone long ago. Vale to all
You can keep telling his stories
My Great Grandfather was too!! 

Sadly he died a day after his 60th birthday back in the 1970’s, he also fought in Papua New Guinea and didn’t get to meet his daughter till she was 1 as he was in Tobruk when she was born.
My mum’s uncle was there too - he died about 15 years ago, and was always close to my pop so I got to see him lots. He was an incredibly humble man with a wicked sense of humour. Amazing, given what the rats went through.
My great uncle was one too!
Thankfully many were interviewed so we can learn from them in a lesser form. 

You can say many things about Dwight D. Eisenhower but you can't say he was wrong when he issued this order: *“Get it all on record now - get the films - get the witnesses - because somewhere down the road of history some bastard will get up and say that this never happened.”*
Probably not a coincidence that it's happening at the same time
You seen subs like /r/combatfootage? It's all being filmed, and it's all fucking brutal as hell.

Nowadays the evidence of the horrors of war is only hidden for people that want to bury their heads in the sand.
o7
Lest we forget.
For those who want to know more, I recommend Peter Fitzsimmon's book: Tobruk. It goes into everything they got up to - often defying orders to assist in the defence.

For example, they were to ignore the old Italian cannons lying around. What did they do? Welded them to trucks, drove them in, handbrakey, fire a shot and fuck off. Lol.
Not to be cheeky, but old mate lived to be 102, so he definitely did grow old...
Lest we forget
Lest we forget
Lest we forget
That quote is most definitely a myth. There’s no evidence at all to suggest he ever said it. 

What we know is true is that Rommel mentions Australians in letters to his wife and described inspecting Australian prisoners. 

“Shortly afterwards a batch of some fifty or sixty Australian prisoners were marched off close beside us — immensely big and powerful men, who without question represented an élite formation of the British Empire, a fact that was also evident in battle. Enemy resistance was as stubborn as ever and violent actions were being fought at many points. All the same, I continued for some time to think that we would be able to maintain our attack and take Tobruk. The only question was whether we had enough troops to go on feeding the attack long enough.” 

He undoubtedly held Australians in very high regard.
It is in his memoirs called the Rommel papers. Lots of people like to say its bullshit but Rommel himself wrote it in a letter to his wife.
Yes, as you might has guessed, Bud Tingwell was a WWII veteran. Unfortunately he died in 2009 at age 86. https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bud_Tingwell

RIP Bud Tingwell.
Yes, I had the same thought and had to look it up. Talk about doppelgängers!
🤣🤣🤣 Omg
That would have been very hard on your family. I hope you and your family received enough support and appreciation to make his sacrifice manageable.
My grandmother was the youngest of seven children in 1942, by 1945 she was the youngest of four. Of the five brothers that went to war two came back, one never spoke about it, lived a normal life and died in the 80s, the other died in 1949 and his official cause of death was listed as "injuries sustained in combat", in other words he committed suicide but in order for his wife and family to get benefits the officials fudged things and from a certain point of view it was the damn truth.

I did some research in the 00s and he served in some of the worst fighting in the Pacific and was captured by the Japanese late in the war, but the few months he spent in their "care" ruined him mentally, emotionally, and physically. 

It wasn't uncommon for people to be listed as war causalities many years after their service.
What's up with bashing Rommel
My great-grandfather (my mother’s father’s father) was at Tobruk, though he was wounded by artillery on the way in and had to be evacuated. His evacuation ship was bombed and sank, but he survived. A lot of his mates didn’t. I never met him, but apparently the war took a terrible mental toll on him.

Back in WWI, he’d fought at the Somme in the British Army. He was actually too young to legally enlist when he did, and too old to be accepted for service when he signed up for the Australian Army in WWII, but he joined both times anyway.
And the Japanese (not at Tobruk obviously) but there were Rats in the Pacific too.

https://anzacportal.dva.gov.au/wars-and-missions/world-war-ii-1939-1945/events/japanese-retreat-1943-1944
If you haven’t read it have a look at Fergal Keane’s Road Of Bones about the battle of Kohima. Very readable history about a critical battle involving British & Indian forces.
My granddad was also in the 2/28th.  He was captured at the battle of Ruin Ridge and taken to a prison camp in Italy. He escaped over the mountains into Switzerland with a couple others. Almost lost his feet to frostbite because he gave his boots to one of the other guys.  I remember seeing his still blackened toes when I was a kid. Crazy story. He died when I was 8 in 1993.  

The book about the battalion by Philip Masel is a good read if you can find it.
Bunch of Allies in WW2 made up of majority Australians, defended a town called Tobruk from Axis troops and armor led by Rommel. They were trapped like 'rats' for almost a year hence the name.
It was the German’s way of trying to demoralise the allies - it had the opposite effect
Tobruk was one of the few major ports on that area of the coast where supplies could be landed so it was seen as critical by both sides. The fact that it was a port was a critical part of its survival as the forces were able to be resupplied (at great risk) by the navy. 

The Australian commander (Morshead) was famously ordered to hold the port for 8 weeks, but the force went on to do so for six and a half months. This stalled Rommel (who had tenuous supply lines across the entire north African coast to begin with) whilst a relief effort could be organised and the Allied forces generally sorted out in Cairo (this took longer and was fucked up more than the British probably care to recall, but there was a war on I suppose). 

After it was finally relieved the war rolled on and ultimately Tobruk changed hands three times.
It was common. The medical inspection wasn't too hard, especially if you looked right.
Not only did you think it, but you actually took the time to write it...
I am... gobsmacked.
The Rats of Tobruk were an Australian-led group that held the port of Tobruk, Libya during a siege in WWII.


They were first called rats by the Germans as an insult as they camped out below ground, but the Australians took it as a badge of honour and started referring to themselves as rats too. They even used scrap metal from a German bomber they shot down to create medals with symbols of rats on them. They were a very impressive force as well as having a cool nickname, taking out twice as many of the Germans/Italians as they lost.
I think this just broke me a little bit. I’ve never read it before. Thanks for sharing
The Rats of Tobruk never went to Europe.
One of the stories about the Rats that brings a bit of a happy tear to my eye is that in 2007 the Victoria branch looking around at their dwindling numbers with more and more men not able to come to their hall in the city decided to sell up and use the funds towards medical research at the children's hospital in Melbourne. They hoped to get a bit over a mill, the place was bought by a trucking magnate for way over the odds and he told the last 11 old boys to hang onto the place as long as they wanted.  
  
""I thought I'd buy it and let you keep it going, because we owe you a debt that can't possibly be repaid," he said."  
  
. [https://www.theage.com.au/national/generosity-keeps-rats-of-tobruk-in-their-albert-park-nest-20070420-ge4per.html](https://www.theage.com.au/national/generosity-keeps-rats-of-tobruk-in-their-albert-park-nest-20070420-ge4per.html)
I imagine these odds drop by a fair bit if you're a soldier in WW2.
For that generation.
I had a patient the other week who was 106. 

Oldest person I’ve ever met.
um, is there a worse illustration than a soldier from WW2? lol
Gordon might have just nominated a different birth date? 

I heard stories about my grandfather getting kicked out of the airforce when they found out he was only 15. 

He got in big trouble from his father, then joined the navy. Different times...
>But on the nominal roll it says that his DOB is 25/5/1919. So that would make him 105, not 102.

Lol we both know how that happened.
My grandfather was in Tobruk with a Victorian regiment but later moved to QLD, and never marched because he didn’t like the reminders of the war. He’s dead now, but was never part of any association and kind of fell through the cracks.

When I grew up everyone in his generation was in the war. Now there are few left. Soon there will be none.
That is why Rommel called them Rats. He thought that would be a name that would sap the morale of our boys. But that ain't the way us Aussies roll lol.

After getting out of the desert then having to go to the tropics would have been bloody hard. 

A true legend and I salute his contribution to the cause. R.I.P sir.
All of the RSL's have The Ode and a minute of silence at dusk.
That’s good to hear, I haven’t been back there since my grandmother went to a age care home and passed away.  That place really had the feel of an RSL, but I’m not sure if it was because of the era, or maybe that particular one is more ‘loyal’. 
Agree…took an interest in them later about 10yrs ago, and the ones I went to seem no different to corporate taverns.  Now I don’t even look out for them anymore.   The town I grew up in, Sarina QLD, is permanently closed now, which would have been more like the one described. 
The RSLs in WA are sub-branches rather than clubs.

I remember visiting family in Sydney and them saying we could go down to the local RSL for dinner. You can imagine the confused look on my face, knowing that you need to be an RSL member to get into one in WA.
Mine too but he died long before I was born. Drank himself to death... PTSD has been a silent killer for too long.
I have been using that subreddit for many years, but I would also suggest looking at both it and other locations if you really want to see war. Years ago, while it held a certain bias (I still remember a video referring the US troops as occupiers... also suffering losses in an IED and ambush attack being downvoted to hell - got removed by automod), it was still a good spot to see what war was like all over the world.


Now if the view isn't from a certain side, it's going to get downvoted to the point the automod will just delete it. It's still an unglamorous view of war, which is important. However, it's also an extremely *biased* unglamorous view of war. Great for showing why we shouldn't be fighting wars, terrible for showing what's really going on in said wars.
o7
I do not recommend that book as Fitsimons repeatedly engages in historical revisionism and holocaust denial, and that's ignoring his blatant nationalism that he makes no effort to hide

Fitzsimons is not a historian, there are many other far better books out there written by reputable historians
And now he joins all his mates up there. Big party upstairs tonight. Roll call is finally complete again.
Not a bad innings by any measure. Rest in peace Tommy.
Don't worry, that's not cheeky at all. You just can't read.
You ought to take everything you hear about Rommel with a grain of salt. His legacy is 90% propaganda by volume
🙏
No sympathy or assistance was asked for and little was received. He was eventually able to return to work and bore the physical consequences of his service without complaint. He was proud of his contribution which he regarded as a sacred duty done. He very seldom wore his medals. A different generation.
Gonna take a wild guess: he was a commander in the Nazi German army.
You mean besides the part where he was a literal nazi? He's also pretty overrated as a general.
Yep, Japanese imperialism was evil too.
My grandad (2/12th) was taken prisoner and escaped through the Alps into Switzerland too. I discovered two years ago via DNA test ing that I have a close relative living near Basel - turned out to be his daughter : )
Thank you! Excellent synopsis!
I'd just like to mention that I'm proud to say that Polish soldiers came to support Australian defendants of Tobruk and we won this fight.
He could have phrased it better, but expressing ignorance shouldn't be met with negativity.
Well that's an aussie attitude if I ever heard one. Good on them
> I’ve never read it before. 

I believe Mr Bilston wrote this poem this June for the 80th anniversary of D-Day. https://mastodon.online/@brianbilston/112569769745034936
Brian Bilston has written some incredible things that made me FEEL.
Reading the comment "Imagine being the last alive of 14,000 soldiers" in the context of World War II reminded me of this poem. Yes, it's D Day and not Tobruk. Sorry I didn't meet your exacting standards.
Not sure the person you are replying to ever said they did…
Thanks for posting this!!!!
RIP Bill, he was an absolute gentleman a true Aussie.
OHHH

I used to work at the Children's and always wondered why there was randomly a display for them in one of the wards covering a whole wall.  There's nothing else like that in any of them.
Damn, that choked me up!  Good on them.
American here, but I can confirm this was done in the States as well.  My father joined our National Guard at 16, although the legal age at the time was 17.  You could get away with things before electronic bookkeeping validated everything about you.
I’ve just read a book called Lost Boys. It’s about some of the underaged boys that joined up in WW1 and what happened to them. It was a good book but hard to read as most didn’t come back.
[Lord Haw-Haw called them rats.](https://ratsoftobrukassociation.org.au/the-siege/why-the-name-2/)

“The Australian troops are fighting magnificently and their training is far superior to ours.” -  Field Marshal Erwin Rommel.  Writing to his wife, Lucia
There's a similar story with a group of destroyers we sent to the mediterannean theatre in WW2. [The Scrap Iron Flotilla](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrap_Iron_Flotilla). Goebbels referred to them as scrap iron because they were all WW1 vintage ships. Woefully outdated by the second world war, Didn't stop them kicking arse. And naturally being Australians they all embraced the name
“That ain’t the way us Aussies roll”

Heh yeah ok..
I grew up around dee why as a kid and the minute of silence is something you dont get at every RSL especially everynight!
All of the ones near me have pokies sections with a bunch of seniors feeding their addictions. The bistro are decent and offer good seniors menus but they no doubt fund it from the pokies profits, pretty disgusting to have them in an RSL if you ask me.
Same, grew up relatively rural and I don't know what I'd call it nowdays/in metro areas but there isn't much memorial about them.
Very true….
Fully agree on the bias. I wouldn't for a second recommend it as a place to go for accurate reporting, just a place to see what the human experience is during war.
o7
Yep, Fitzsimmons hugs the flag way too much. It’s good to tell their story but he picks out all the goods bits and writes around that in typical journalist fashion. 

This isn’t fan fic, it’s an ugly piece of history with several complicated people, events and factors that it shouldn’t be reduced to “Aussies did this and it was awesome”
Spot on summation of his work.
Smaller details(unit names etc) are often wrong too.
Sure but that is a quote from an actual letter written to his wife.
He was also a legendarily moronic strategic level commander, fortunately for us.
Mate shut the fuck up, he was well respected by the Aussie and British troops
Yeah, I know! He was well respected by the Allies so why the bashing?
Yeah, nah, sorry. When everyone these days has a super computer in the palm of their hand & seeing the content of the post... no excuse for that.
He could have just looked it up and gotten a better answer than you'd get in this thread.  That's what I did.
I found the poem to be very beautiful and relevant. Then I got to the last line. Are they putting tomato sauce on Ice-Cream?
Ah, thank you for the correction. I am fascinated by history but I want to know accurate things lol
Call us something like a rat to try to destroy our morale and it is likely to have the opposite result. Try to lord it over us to make us do shit that we know is not right? "You and whose fkn army, sunshine?" is the attitude you are likely to get. 

Rommel didn't have huge respect for us as fighters for nothing you know.
Yeah I was a bit shocked too
One near me is *just* acceptable to me because outside has a heap of old military vehicles, artillery pieces etc etc, and some modern ones that you can go up and touch, climb on etc etc. It's rather impressive being able to walk around a tank, go right to it and touch it. I've got on top of it once - really gives different perspective. Being able to sit in the gunner seat of a anti aircraft gun. They all have plaques with info. 

It also is really good for the younger generation - it's interactive, it's *interesting*. I took my little nephew around them once. He climbed all over everything, wanted to try every latch etc etc. The reasoning and respect can come later. But he had a good time, asked a billion questions and was engaged. 

Mine comes from knowing some of the blokes. They won't have that. Stuff behind glass isn't interesting. An 25 pounder he can turn the knobs on and look down the barrel of is. 

But yeah - inside is pokies. Can hear them no matter what part you are in since it has a big open floor plan.
Depends if they are close to an army barracks or not
I didn't mean that towards *you* specifically, sorry. Just a general rule of thumb
Shit-tier strategist, to say the least. 

Should have remained a capable battalion commander and left it at that.

People forget the man’s legacy was beating the Italians in 1917, the French in 1940 and the English in 1941. And now he’s got a millions of wheraboo fans online *golf clap*
Don't tell me to shut up. **He. Was. A. Nazi.** And he was a mediocre commander at best. He just got incredibly *incredibly* lucky in France.
You’re confusing the concept of respecting the threat an enemy represents with treating them respectfully. 

Beyond that, read the room champ.
Yes there is. You can't expect everyone to research everything before commenting. Asking for information isn't a bad thing. This arrogant attitude just makes you look like an elitist ass
There was a good answer to his comment though.
strawberry topping of course!
Big brand tomato sauce has pretty much the same sweetness as ice cream toppings.
Ahh I thought you were debating the veracity of the quote my bad. 

Yeah that is true, not much different to Patton etc though.
Yes, I can.
No, asking for information is not a bad thing. Asking in an asinine way is.
Maybe, in your opinion, which isn't fact btw & I don't agree.

If upon reading the og post & seeing the attached pic, you
A) can't be fucked looking up what everybody has mentioned, or
B) ask about it with some form of respect,
then I would say you could possibly be up for some criticism.
I'm not entirely sure why you're getting your knickers in a twist about it, but then people can be strange & you are, I'm assuming, people.

Edit to add; I'm also entirely certain you have no idea what elitist means.
I literally said he could have phrased it better
