When was the last time you need exactly 5 cent coin in cash? Given that we mostly use cards now the use of 5 cent coins just further diminishes.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Yeah I used one at the supermarket today, then used one to unscrew a battery thing on a digital thermometer. Handy stuff all round tbqh.
They'll do it when the value of the metal content is worth more than the value of the coin, just like with 1 and 2c coins.
Every time I buy a scratchie ticket I need a 5 cent piece. 😊
I used one today 😊 Cash is king, don’t let it die.
Maybe unpopular, but pretty much the entire reason I hate carrying cash is because of coins. Notes fit fine in my wallet, but I hate having a pocketful of coins. Personally I am fine with getting rid of cash altogether, and I know all the arguments against that, but personally don't find them persuasive.
I mean I feel at least part of this is inflation. I was thinking exactly this the other day. Then quick go to where it would make more sense to make maybe a $1 and $2 note and fuck off all the coins. Like shit 5c doesn't by anything? .50c barely buys anything now.
Make the coins smaller like NZ and all the Pacific island countries did 10-20 years ago

To avoid "inflation", instead of using rounding, just disregard the final digit of cents if paying cash e.g. $9.41 and 9.49 both become $9.40
[deleted]
[deleted]
Feel like it will contribute to inflation so no.
I would notice if they stopped minting them, its like 1 and 2 cent coins , still legal tender. 

I like things that are tender.
I think we should phase out the 20 dollar note. Given that we use mostly cards now the use of 20 dollar note just further diminishes.
And then any lily is 10c.used to be 1c then they got rid of those and so on.
... it feels awesome when you can give the exact amount, to the 5cent.
The rules were set long ago that 4 and under rounded down and 5 and over rounded up, thus $9.41 > $9.40 and $9.49 > $9.50.
Make the $1 a triangle. Introduce a new $5 coin in the shape of a Rubik's cube. Start accepting bread tags as currency. You now get paid in fish hooks.
No card transactions would still not be rounded, exactly like now.
What? this makes no sense at all. Why would card transactions need to be rounded?
Rounding for cash payments is already applied to the total, not individual items, why would that change?
This is one of the most insanely stupid things I've read today 


What do you think happens today to an item that's 0.93? It's already being rounded.


And that's only if one is paying by cash 
This only applies if every single transaction anyone does is paid in cash which is basically the opposite to the world right now.
I get your point. I mean, it's already a joke that people do get charged more or less because of the rounding rules between cash and card. Then add on places that actually upfront have different prices for cash or card payment. Then add on how there seems to be very little regulation regarding how businesses can lay down these arbitrary charges due to whatever reason - "it costs more to handle cash, so we favour eftpos...oh yeah there's a percentage charge on the eftpos..." - meanwhile old mate is goin' "Oh mate for cash you get it 3 bucks cheaper eh?". AND YES, I know we are just talking about 5c coins, but count them. They probably are on the way out so spend 'em while you can. Do we even have a loose lolly for 5c anymore?
Yeah sooner or later they might introduce some futuristic voodoo tech like a plastic card you can tap or something. God damn Illuminati at it again.
You will still be able to, except it'll be 10c instead of 5c. Op wants the prices to go up even more.
Bottle caps like Fallout
You haven't seen a lot of the world, have you...
Who cares about 2 or 3 cents? No one. We got rid of the coins 40 years ago. NZ got rid of the 5c coin ages ago and nothing of value was lost.  We don't want to be like the US, still pinching pennies.
Multiply 2 or 3 cents by over 20 million. Give that to the banks and landholders and shareholders - i.e. the already wealthy. Let them use that to prop up their wealth to guarantee they only get gains, even on small interest. I'm not saying we need a 5c coin, i'm saying we need to look at the structures that benefit from devaluing small currency (and as a whole, devaluing cash). Interest works in tiny increments, but if you don't acknowledge the sheer power it has on currency you're not paying attention.  
edit - Haha you're right nothing was lost in the scrapping of the NZ 5c. It was a gain because it cost you more to produce than what it was worth. Why didn't they just change the coin? Nah they were just like, ah fuck it it's too hard. Thanks for making me look that up. But now, the US pinching pennies? Wtf are you even talking about? They still have dollar bills made from cotton and shit. They don't give a crap, generally. Bear in mind - it was the US who started this whole fucking consumerist ideal back in the day with cheques, credit cards, and all that cashless bullshit, this is nothing new. It's a form of societal control that only works when you don't question it.
They still use 1c coins in the US and you just throw them away. No one wants them.  
Cash is close to finished in this country. Since Covid when I occasionally use cash the staff seem to not know how to give change any more. They encounter it so infrequently. I'm not pro or anti cash but pissing around with tiny valueless coins is a net cost, not a saving.
