Can someone please explain what the point of killing sharks, crocodiles etc when they are suspected (or even confirmed) of attacking or killing humans? I can only imagine the trauma and absolute devastation a family and victim must face in these attacks but what is the point of killing the wild animal? 

Edit: people are saying that this is done to reduce the risk of the animal hunting humans (essentially becoming “man eaters”). Ok, so in shark attacks, how do we know which shark attacked/killed the human for us to go out and kill that specific shark? 

[https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-05/people-filmed-feeding-crocodiles-where-tourist-disappeared/104181380](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-05/people-filmed-feeding-crocodiles-where-tourist-disappeared/104181380)
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
It's mitigating both a real and perceived risk to people and other animals. Officials are trying to reduce the instances of:

1. repeated predatory behaviour by the individual animal.

2. Vigilantes trying to kill whatever animal they think did it, risking themselves and wildlife getting injured or killed in the process

3. General panic and discomfort in the community, fear bout going places, loss of revenue from people not travelling there or being out and about
Answering to your edit:

Identifying the shark is not so easy. They rely on eyewitnesses & dna samples + bite marks to  identify the species. Then you can only search in the area. Microsatellite genotyping can determine whether it was the same shark that attacked a human or no.
Because of the risk that they'll [continue to prey on humans.](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Man-eater)
Because once you taste long pork, you can never go back
[deleted]
So that it doesn't kill another human.
Crocs that take humans are killed for a couple of reasons.  First, they are often very sick after taking part of a human because they generally have a much leaner diet (fish etc). This sick appearance makes it a bit easier for Rangers to identify the 'one' that is likely to have taken the human, as it will be slow and sickly. Second, they are then killed to retrieve any stomach contents which will confirm the death of the person, even if no other part of the person is recovered.  The waterways crocs inhabit are often very silty, murky and/or fast running with the tide, so relying on finding a body washed up is not always possible.  I'm really sorry this sounds so morbid, and hope not too upsetting.
To make sure they get the message
> Edit: people are saying that this is done to reduce the risk of the animal hunting humans (essentially becoming “man eaters”). Ok, so in shark attacks, how do we know which shark attacked/killed the human for us to go out and kill that specific shark? 

We don't but if it's the only shark within the radius there's a high probability it was that shark.
What I find hard to accept is that we do this to animals but not to human predators, the death penalty (as flawed as it is) could save untold cost and misery.
I guess they're hoping to find human remains in the stomach.

EDIT: speak of the devil, they [did](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-06/human-remains-found-in-crocodile-search-queensland/104187646)
I don’t understand why we put animals (dogs) down after one bite. But it’s against the law to put down paedophiles.
I mean we already kill probably hundreds of thousands if not millions more animals than we actually need to as part of the meat industry, what's a few extra crocodiles or sharks on the side?
With crocs at least, if they're attacking people they're probably living in an area frequented by humans. Means there's going to be a greatly increased risk of another person getting munched on. Also they taste good.

Sharks I'm not really in support of killing (unless it's a bull shark. Fuck bull sharks). Most sharks are pretty chill and are only biting you because they have no idea what you are and biting is pretty much the only way to figure out that you are not in fact food. If you ever get the opportunity I highly recommend swimming with them, they're really beautiful animals.
Recovering remains.
Basically to mitigate risk of maneating behavior.

Although in crocodilians and sharks I'm not sure whether this is targeted hunting vs. opportunism?

Some of the more interesting modern cases of maneaters going unchecked is in the writing of Jim Corbett in British India.

He was the go-to to kill maneating tigers and leopards in modern day Uttarakhand state for the first half of the 20th century.

The accounts of human losses he witnessed are graphic, and some of the deaths caused by individual animals top 300. 
Many were of the tigers involved were injured, either by nature or man and turned to humans as easier prey.
Although in the case of the Chowgarh tigress, she had a sub adult cub that may have been groomed to view humans as food.

There are still multiple killings by individual tigers in India to this day, so at least with tigers we can see a pattern of predation and ongoing danger to humans.
I think it's mostly to get rid of individual animals that are more aggressive towards humans, though I wonder if in the long run it makes the whole species less likely to prey on human beings. A lot of predators don't fuck with humans and I have to assume that comes from a long history of humans proving themselves to be something you don't want to fuck with. I don't know how well that really works with more simple minded animals like crocs and sharks, though.
So that the animal doesn't do it again.
My guess is that if they’ve done it once, they may do it again. So, if the animal is gone, there’s a zero risk of that happening.
Because humans gain pleasure from being vindictive. Plain and simple.
Its that old fashioned mindset that most older Australians live by "....and let that be a lesson"
>Why do we kill a wild animal when they are suspected of killing a human?

Unless, of course, they walk on two legs then they’re released on bail.
To confirm that the particular animal did the kill by recovering body parts which can then also be used for a funeral.
emptying the bins regularly at the Annan boat ramp might help prevent people dumping scraps. There aren’t alot of options for tourists to dispose of fishing scraps around town . It’s an issue at all our boat Ramps and the jetty in town. This year I’ve seen a croc at the Cooktown ramp and one at Annan boat ramp, in the past I’ve never seen them @ the ramp.
Revenge
We’re soft and slow. The ones that figure that out need to die.
So they don't tell their mates how delicious human is.
Sends a message to the animal kingdom. Human clan ain't nothing to fuck wid 
Why wouldn’t you?
Because humans are scum
So they don't kill more humans once they get a taste. Trying to protect civilization n all thaf
Certain animals get a blood thirst for humans over their normal prey (eg. tigers, leopards), so to prevent that I’d imagine. However, I disagree with the premise. In India, there are 63 leopards in a particular forest who are man-eaters, and they are kept in a separate confined part of the forest (with plenty of space and trees etc) - the walls are high enough that they can’t climb out but other animals can fly or fall in and still be hunted by them, they are also cared for by humans. I thought this was much more humane than killing them for simply exercising their true nature.
An animal that successfully preys on a human is more likely to attempt to prey on more humans.

Same thing happens with dogs. Once they've been blooded, they're pretty much fucked because they'll rip other animals to shreds for fun, making them as dangerous as cats are naturally.
If you have a pet bird, open it's cage's door and let it go free. If it comes back, you and it are meant to be together. If it doesn't come back, hunt it down and kill it.
Cos we're top of the food chain and we can!

Sad but true.
Gotta send a message. Hand written in blood. Hope the sorry bastards can read, cause i sure can't
Questions like this is how you know we have come too far from the food chain and now we grow weak
Because it isn’t a shark’s or crocodile’s place to attack or eat humans. It’s not something we can allow any particular animal to repeat.
Because game of thrones
Revenge?
Two cases come to mind with your comment. 

[A mako shark](https://www.thesharkfiles.com/dive-into-the-red-sea) caught in Egypt in 2010, whose unique jaw and teeth structure were successfully matched to bite marks on two swimmers at Sharm El-Sheikh. 

And a 2022 DNA study examined the wounds of victims and found a 95% probability that [the same tiger shark](https://www.faxinfo.fr/en/faits-divers-accident-avec-un-requin-a-saint-martin-et-nevis-en-2020-21-il-sagit-du-meme-squale/) had bitten two different people on Caribbean islands 70 km apart - though that specific shark was never located.

Finding 'the right shark' is extremely difficult though, as you allude to. In cases where that happens there's often a wider cull which kills 'innocent' sharks, or even 'non-target species', like when baited hooks are used. Generally in Australia nowadays, there is no reactive culling in the wake of a shark attack. Sometimes a helicopter is sent on patrol to locate the shark and make sure they move on, mostly just to give a sense of peace of mind and *something* being done.
While there are documented cases of "man-eaters" - animals that repeatedly attack humans - these are exceptional occurrences. Most animal attacks are isolated incidents.
> Unlike leopards and lions, man-eating tigers rarely enter human habitations to acquire prey. 

Rarely? Not never? …Hangon, is Wikipedia saying those other cats *do* do it?!!

> In Asia, man-eating leopards usually attack at night, and **have been reported to break down doors and thatched roofs in order to reach human prey**. 

Farrrrk that. I’ll stick with redbacks, thanks. Leopards can fuck right off. 
They’re literally designed to prey on living things though?
We kill them for having a natural instinct? That’s a terrible argument imo
The stories about the rats and the squid are creepy as hell.
Strike fear into the inferior species, like god intended /s
Kids in 500 years: mom what happened to all the sharks 
Parents: child the sharks were all murdered so that humans could establish dominance over the oceans and it was justified by villainising their instincts
Should we really be blaming an innocent animal for having an innate desire to feed instead of just avoiding the animal?
A crocs diet will consist of anything it’s capable of catching, including pigs, kangaroos and cattle, I doubt a human would make a crocodile sick because it’s not lean….
>First, they are often very sick after taking part of a human because they generally have a much leaner diet (fish etc). This sick appearance makes it a bit easier for Rangers to identify the 'one' that is likely to have taken the human, as it will be slow and sickly. 

Complete bullshit btw, Crocs are river creatures and they eat plenty of mammals all across the world.
That's not the case in Australia. My mate works for Enviro Dept and traps/removes crocs that are a problem. They can often identify the croc because it will 'parade' after a big kill, swimming around brazenly visible and happy, maybe with a bit of their kill still hanging out of their mouth.
Kind of you to soften your answer at the end, we don't see that much around these parts.
Thank you for explaining so well and you have a very good heart. 🙏🏽
There are cases where the shark will linger in the immediate area after an attack, like [in Hurghada, Egypt](https://www.news.com.au/travel/travel-updates/incidents/horror-moment-russian-tourist-mauled-to-death-by-shark-in-egyptian-resort-hurghada/news-story/1e05c2b4e0b43a2db93f40c196da08ad) last year, but generally they're on the move and considering the speed and distances they can cover and their ability to camouflage, it can be hard to locate them unless the response is lightning quick. And even then, in most developed countries, like Australia or New Zealand, a reactive targeted cull isn't really done anymore, and the most you'll see is a drone or helicopter watching the shark and making sure it leaves the area.
Death penalty just gives the government a legal way to kill people. Eventually they’ll be killing people for looking at a rich person funny.
Turns out we tried that, and it doesn't.
Probably is a factor. Though I wonder if my family would want my torn apart, partially digested remains that much.
>*'So if I can shoot rabbits,*  
*then I can shoot fascists'*  
  
*-* [*If You Tolerate This, Then Your Children Will Be Next* ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zw-5Syqmg4g)
Fuck bull sharks? I foresee a lot of logistical and biological difficulties.
It's funny 'cause the 'rogue shark' theory was put forward with no reasonable evidence to support it back in the mid 20th century. It was basically just a hunch. Jaws and other shark fiction ran with it but subsequently it's been dismissed by many shark researchers. However, in recent years there's been some revision, as there are at least two cases which could fall into the definition and lend some support to the theory.

Over a single week in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt in 2010, [one oceanic whitetip shark](https://www.thesharkfiles.com/dive-into-the-red-sea) bit at least 3 people. This was confirmed by eyewitnesses sightings and photographs that identified her distinctively deformed tail fin. Then in 2022 DNA testing from wounds of bite victims found a 95% probability that [the same tiger shark](https://www.faxinfo.fr/en/faits-divers-accident-avec-un-requin-a-saint-martin-et-nevis-en-2020-21-il-sagit-du-meme-squale/) had bitten two different people on Caribbean islands 70 km apart. For now though there isn't really enough evidence to draw conclusions and say a shark that bites someone may well do it again. Considering how relatively rare and isolated shark attacks are it seems likely that's actually not the case.
Might depend on how religious - or what faith - the family was? I remember a brutal [2004 fatal shark attack](https://www.cbc.ca/news/world/shark-attack-victim-s-family-opposes-kill-order-1.510898) in Adelaide where the father very strongly publicly opposed the kill order.
Isn’t it our job to either fix the soft/slow problem or avoid those areas until we’ve figured it out?
Surely death for them all isn’t the best option
I always find this a difficult one as sharks, sea animals etc domain is the ocean. We are land animals therefore if we go into the sharks “home” and get bitten etc or worse then why do we kill the shark for doing what it does in life in its home? As humans we understand this is a risk when going into the ocean therefore why must the shark suffer for our risk taking. It’s just being a shark!
We kill them for preying on humans. Typically speaking, we don't want tourists dying because nobody warned them about swimming in the Northern Territory, and the same applies for dealing with animals that have proven themselves maneaters. We have no problem if they eat a kangaroo.
There are plenty of natural things that kill or remove, we exterminate wasps and other undesirables from a given area because they're pests that could harm us if we left them there, not because they're morally evil or whatever.

I don't think we should go around killing sharks that are out in the ocean bothering no-one, but if it gets close enough to places where we swim I'd much rather a dead shark then a dead or maimed person.
Imagine downvoted for having compassion lol
Listen, humans matter, animals don't matter, we are the master species, just how it works bro
I don't necessarily disagree, but I feel like a lot of people say this but don't actually act on it. A lot of people say "well of course a shark is going to attack you, you're going into it's home!" but how many people stop swimming in the ocean after saying it?
You know how you’re not supposed to feed animals at zoos or parks because you might make those same animals attack later humans who fail to provide food? Like, the animal gets expectations that humans provide food, and then attacks in an attempt to get it?

Maneaters are just one step further. After they learn humans _are_ a possible food source, they are more likely to specifically hunt for it. Maneaters are very likely to be repeat offenders, they are exceptionally dangerous in a way other members of their species are not.
Yeah that sounded entirely made up.
Crocs basically lived through the asteroid that destroyed most of the dinosaurs, eating anything and everything. 

"Oh no, i can't eat a human because they are too fat.."
And other crocodiles
Yeah, we've all seen Nat Geo docos where gazelles or whatever have to be super careful when going to drink from a river because super death dinosaurs live in it and will not hesitate to eat them alive.
Recently because of population expansion in places like SE Asia and South America the number of people taken by monster pythons has increased. This is the routine as well, to kill them to get at the stomach contents. The videos that have been leaked show a fully swallowed whole human. Its an incredible thing to see in these videos.  The pythons have no problems swallowing humans, head first.
They'd probably rather have DNA confirmation that you're dead than live the rest of their lives wondering where you are (if there's no witnesses or remains just one slightly off predator in the area known to attack humans).

Otherwise probably not.
I'm not talking about rogue shark theory, I'm just talking about say, a saltwater crocodile, if it kills one person, then it's not a very long bet to say it may kill another one. Not because it's a rogue, or a bad guy, just that it's a saltwater crocodile.
We do actually have some evidence of certain crocs doing this sort of thing.

[Gustave](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gustave_(crocodile)) is the main example, a male Nile crocodile in Burundi that regularly attacked people for years. We don't have firm numbers on the number of the people its attacked and ate, and some of the supposed stats of 300+ victims are probably well overblown, but its known to [National Geographic ](https://www.sciencetimes.com/articles/44266/20230612/gustave-crocodile-giant-man-eater-burundi-who-eaten-300-people.htm)and multiple scientists have studied it.

Gustave was 6.1 m or so, which is very big for a Nile Crocodile, though, and that means it was specifically recognisable. The size is also important because it was speculated that the crocodile attacked people because its size and weight meant that it was too slow to catch typical prey, Zebra, Antelope, etc, so it switched to people.

There's also the saltwater [Lolong](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lolong), the largest crocodile kept in captivity, which was originally captured after being suspected of eating missing water buffalo, a fisherman and a 12-year-old girl. However, they didn't find buffalo or human remains in his stomach contents after he was captured, so there's speculation it wasn't actually him, or another, reportedly even larger crocodile.

I'd argue that characterising them as 'rogue' sharks or crocs is a mischaracterisation, anyway. They're predators, they don't distinguish morally between seals, cows or people. They see prey, and if they find a kind of prey that can be caught easily, then they'll do that again if the opportunity comes along.

It's also believable since we know they have good memory capacity. We have records of some Saltwater crocodiles storing food, and others congregating in groups around fruit bat roosting trees where they know they'll be bats flying near the water at dusk. It's easily possible that a croc could learn that boats or bathing area -> large mammal that can't swim well --> food.

Sharks are also slightly different because unlike crocodiles, which have interacted with and preyed on people in and around rivers for thousands of years, sharks are oceanic and usually unfamiliar with people. This is why most shark attacks aren't fatal, the shark bites mainly to figure out what it's biting into, or because it thinks the person is a more familar prey species like a seal.
It’s less about family wishes and more about closing the loop on a death.
>animals don't matter

Wait until you find out what would happen if we had no bees.
Fucking hate this anthropocentric way of thinking.
When you take the position that an animal is gonna do what it's gonna do, it doesn't necessarily follow that you're a hypocrite for going into their territory anyway. You just have to accept that injury/death is part of the risks of being there. Animals don't even rate close to the biggest risk in most places anyway, but there's always the chance. The ocean is one of the best examples of that mindset tbh.

I don't know what it's like anywhere else, but in Australia when a surfer is taken by a shark the family will generally publicly state that they don't want the animal responsible hunted because the surfer was in the shark's territory and it's not what they would have wanted.
I mean I refuse to go into the ocean 🥲 and any kind of murky unsafe water in an around Australia especially the NT. Here bull sharks are known to “relocate” into isolated areas of water (like a pond at a golf course) during floods whether on purpose or by accident… there’s really no safe place other than a pool that you can see the bottom of.
Fun fact: Like snakes, I always eat jellybabies head first, so the arms and legs don’t get stuck in my throat.
I have an Indonesian friend. When she was in high school, she personally saw a girl from her class being taken out of the belly of a python which swallowed her whole. What a terrifying thing to watch
'*Say*, a saltwater crocodile' 

What exactly *are* you talking about then? Could be lions too? Tigers? Komodo Dragons? They're different animals with many differing behaviours.
Exactly.
If I go into the woods and get eaten by a bear, that's on me.
That's my fault, not the bear's.

I trespassed, and I did something to scare or upset the bear.
That's just a natural risk I accept when I wander off into the woods.

Do I want to die a gruesome death at the hands of a bear? Not particularly.

But that's a risk I'm ok with taking. 

And if I die, I'd rather the time and energy be spent in making people more knowledgeable about how to react to bears and/or planting some more berry bushes/food supply for the bears. Make something good come out of it, not more unnecessary death.
I find this so ironic that only humans have the capacity to 'care' about other species survival, so much so that we put our own lives at risk. But for predators food is the highest high and apex predators are the best learners, they do not share your compassion, they want to kill and get extreme gratification from doing so. 

Lets put humans lives first and aim to eliminate animal suffering.
Sharks are generally chill, I've swum with lots of them and they just tend to ignore you.

  
Except bull sharks. Fuck bull sharks. Demon spawn. Bastards are ambush predators too so you don't see them coming, you just skip straight from "oh what a lovely day" to "Oh god oh fuck". Just fly right by the "Hey maybe I should be worried" and "Ok time to exit the water now" stages.
"Say" is just an English idiom, it's suggesting an example.

Different behaviours or not, if an animal kills one human, the preference will be to kill that animal rather than take even a \*tiny\* risk of it killing again, simply because we don't really value the lives of non-human animals.
For komodo dragons, we don't have info, that I could find, of specific dragons learning to prey on people, but some attacks are [recorded](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/the-most-infamous-komodo-dragon-attacks-of-the-past-10-years-5831048/), mostly local villagers that live nearby.

But Man-eater lions and tigers are an actual phenomenon, specific animals that learn to prey on people. There's consistent literature on this, going at least back to the late 1800s. 

**Lion and Tiger Man-Eaters** 

\[not necessary but I thought I might as well go into some depth, because you're an Shark/animal enthusiast and might enjoy it\]

For lions, repeated man-eaters tend to be males without a pride, which have a tendency to hunt whatever and however they can anyway. Lionesses independently and in prides will hunt people given the opportunity, but almost always as an isolated case.

The [most famous case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tsavo_Man-Eaters) of this is the [Tsavo Man-eaters,](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/man-eaters-of-tsavo-11614317/) a pair of male lions, who attacked labourers during the construction of the Kenya-Uganda Railway in 1898. They are believed to have killed dozens of people, with 138 being a common number cited in early sources and the semi-famous book their hunter, John Patterson, later wrote, though later analysis of his journal counted around 28-31. In any case, they forced a halt to construction entirely as workers fled, before eventually being hunted by the aforementioned Patterson. He took photos afterward, and their skin was turned into rugs for his house before being reconstructed by the Field Museum in Chicago, where they remain, alongside their skulls. The case has inspired multiple movies. They were notable for almost entirely lacking manes, and later analysis showed one had severely damaged jaw, which likely impacted its normal hunting.
It’s almost as if we’re majorly responsible for killing and extinguishing animals at an unnatural rate, thus it is our duty to look after them.
Lol this reminded me... I was surfing in South Aus on my own years ago, and a large shadow darted past underneath me. I thought 'OK this is it, it's a Great White, this is my time, goodbye world!' Then a seal popped up a metre from me. I was relieved, but still worried as my friend had been bitten on the cheek by a seal in the same area. It then proceeded to spray a mouthful of water at my face, then swam away like a happy sea-dog. I laughed hard. While feeling like, that was gross you naughty seal.
Later, the Njombe pride of roughly fifteen lions killed hundreds of people, with a commonly cited number is 1500, but at a minimum many hundreds, between 1932 and 1942 in Tanzania. This is speculated to have been linked to an outbreak of rinderpest in the area, which led to cullings of wild herd animals to try and stop the disease spreading, and thus a lack of normal lion prey. It is also worth noting that there was a similar outbreak across Africa in 1898 before the Tsavo Man-eater incidents. It's believed this encompassed at least 3 generations of the pride teaching human predation to each other, with the lions also being reported to ignore cattle while attacking their human herders.

There are other lion cases going into the 2000s, but those are two of the largest incidences. The below is a good resource, which covers both the above and trends in general.

[https://bioone.org/journals/journal-of-east-african-natural-history/volume-90/issue-1/0012-8317\_2001\_90\_1\_TSOMAL\_2.0.CO\_2/The-Science-of-Man-Eating-Among-Lions-Panthera-leo-With/10.2982/0012-8317(2001)90\[1:TSOMAL\]2.0.CO;2.pdf](https://bioone.org/journals/journal-of-east-african-natural-history/volume-90/issue-1/0012-8317_2001_90_1_TSOMAL_2.0.CO_2/The-Science-of-Man-Eating-Among-Lions-Panthera-leo-With/10.2982/0012-8317(2001)90[1:TSOMAL]2.0.CO;2.pdf) 

As to human hunting tigers, there is a [long history of such](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiger_attack), mainly among Bengal tigers in India and surrounding countries. Attacks in India are also believed to have accelerated with the British Raj, which expanded infrastructure into wilder areas. 

For tigers, the man-eating phenomena is generally associated with old, sick or injured individuals, and often follows the predation of farm animals as the predator becomes familar with people. 

Probably the most prolific was the [Champawat Tiger](https://www.tigersafariindia.co.uk/understanding-man-eating-tigers-of-india-causes-impacts/), which is believed to have killed roughly 200 people in Nepal and then, when driven out of Nepal, over another 200 in the Champawat region of India, before being killed by hunter and also conservationist Jim Corbett. The tiger, specifically a tigress, was found to have broken both the upper and lower canine teeth, thus impairing her hunting ability. 

Honestly, though, there's a plethora of tigers killing multiple people, including [cases in 2019 and 2018](https://undark.org/2022/05/16/indias-man-eating-tigers-entangled-in-a-blame-game/). It's also an issue with controversies, mainly the division between conservationists and park managers, who want the culprit animals tranquilised and moved to zoos, and scared residents of affected communities who prefer the animal be shot to remove it as soon as possible.

Anyway, thank you for coming to my ted talk.
Grown seals are cool as fuck. I always get a bit twitchy if there's a pup in the water with me though, because they can get too friendly and if you touch them Mum or Dad is nearby and will *fuck you up*. 

Still though, always great to see them in the wild. Super inquisitive, very playful animals. Now you've made me miss living in Scotland. I remember one time in Shetland I was on a sand bar connecting a smaller island to the main one, this little dome appears in the water in the distance. Little seal just staring at us. Disappears under the water for a moment, reappears a bit closer still just staring at us like "what the fuck is you?". Does that about a dozen times.
