Looking at getting private health,  and not sure what the stature of limitations are when it comes to disclosing decade info.
My mum has a history of knee issues in her later years,  and I want to include it into the cover.  I also popped my knee out over 10 years ago and went to hospital briefly. Popped back in instantly,  was more a cautioning visit, rather than treatment. If I don't disclose it, will it fall back on me should I require attention under the policy?
Never had insurance before,  so the process is all new to me.


PHI is community-rated in Australia and NOT individual rated. Meaning you don't pay extra nor can you be excluded for pre-existing conditions and you won't be asked to declare anything in your application. The only thing the insurers can do is impose a waiting period (typically 12 months for hospital cover claims for a pre-existing condition, but varies, so do check). This stops people from busting their knee, taking out cover, making a claim for a knee reconstruction and rehab admission, then cancelling the cover, and making it unviable for insurers. HTH :)
I’ve had private health for a long time, so I can’t recall the application process. But I don’t think I had to declare anything at the time of applying and taking out health cover.

The issue of pre existing conditions will come up if and when you make a claim. For example, if you need to get a knee reconstruction.

Waiting periods may apply if you have a pre existing condition. But it should not preclude you permanently from coverage for that issue.
https://www.legislation.gov.au/C2007A00031/latest/text

That's the legislation, search "pre-existing" for the text of the Act relating to pre-existing conditions. In summary, for the first 12 months of your cover, if there are signs and symptoms (defined in the Act) of your condition in the 6 months prior to joining your cover, the condition can be considered pre-existing and the insurer won't have to pay out your claim. 

You don't have to know about it, your doctors don't have to know about it, there just has to be evidence that the condition existed, so if your dislocated knee was totally fine for a year and then startred getting wobbly again, and a scan shows you have long-term damage, then it doesn't matter if you and your doctor think it's a new thing, there's evidence it was there.

That said, you could be shitting yourself every day, get health insurance, go to a doctor the next week and tell them it started yesterday, and there'll be no evidence of anything wrong.

So if you are going in for anything, just call and check with your provider that it will be covered, and do it with enough time to go through the process, as a lot of people are surprised when their note from the doctor says "definitely not pre-existing" but there is other evidence that shows it is and they are denied, i.e. a scan showing chondral wear like you might show.
Ex-private health industry here. If you didn’t do any lasting damage I wouldn’t mention it.

The key will be if in the first 12 months of the policy you have an injury and there are signs, symptoms or the like that the injury was caused by an existing condition. Your knowledge of the injury is irrelevant as they default to whether a doctor would otherwise pick up on it on medical review.

So unless you tell them, or a doctor can tell you did this 14yrs ago from the state of your knee you should be good.

However, I would simply go in with the expectation that you will be waiting the 12 months regardless. The process for signing off on whether an injury is pre-existing is lengthy and stressful with no guarantees.
This thread has been removed as a likely self-post about politics. If this was politics or election related; please submit to the megathread. Memes should be submitted to /r/Ausmemes. Centrelink related question should be directed to /r/Centrelinkoz. If this submission doesn't fit those categories please contact the mods to have it approved.

If you believe your post has been removed in error (for example, it's not about politics), please [contact the moderators](https://www.reddit.com/message/compose?to=%2Fr%2Faustralia) to have it restored. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Thanks for explaining that.  Last year, my family received over $20k worth of benefits from our PHI.  I have been wondering if it's like car/house insurance and they're gonna raise my premiums or fire us.
