I’m pretty sure it’s packaging doesn’t meet EU requirements for sale in France. Perhaps it is for export to Canada?
I think they export to New Caladonia
It will be sold in New Caledonia and bora bora, Tahiti etc. There's probably a law in France and it's territories that the ingredients must be in French but no such law for the name/cover.
Usually, they just whack a sticker over all the details for the local language.   
They do it all the time here in the EU.  
Some places probably have more relaxed laws on it.
And its spelling is Merican. "Energise"
I'm more concerned with our health rating system giving 5 stars to a drink that has about 50 grams of sugar.
Up & Microplasic
Because it's secretly Canadian.


(Everything has to be in English and French here.)
Because the last 20% that isn’t Australian made is Maple syrup, sorry
I’ll give you one guess.
They do it here too for our imported stuff.
And this kids is why you shouldn't trust everything you see on the internet.

Where on earth did you get 50 grams from? As per the nutrition label, it has 16.5 grams of sugar, most of which just come from lactose which is naturally occurring: [https://www.sanitarium.com/au/products/up-and-go/energize/choc-flavour](https://www.sanitarium.com/au/products/up-and-go/energize/choc-flavour)

I love shitting on the food and beverage industry as much as you do, but Up&Go is reasonably healthy given its macronutrients and ingredients.
For better or for worse, it’s compared to similar products in its category.

I’m not even sure what category it exists in. Comparing it to oats or muesli, it would probably get 1-star. Comparing it to orange juice or iced coffee, it’s probably got enough ‘healthy’ stuff to push it over the line
It's got 15g of sugar. 24g carbs if you want to be pedantic. If you aren't eating excess calories, there's nothing wrong with it.
I agree, I hope no one actually thinks this is healthy
>INGREDIENTS: Water, skim milk powder, soy protein, cane sugar, vegetable oils (sunflower, canola), wheat maltodextrin, milk protein concentrate, fructose, plant fibre, cocoa (0.5%), acidity regulator (potassium citrate), vegetable gums (460, 466, 407), flavour, mineral (calcium), stabiliser (452), vitamins (C, B3, A, D2, B2, B1, B12, B6), salt.

So, cane sugar, maltodextrin, fructose.  Yep, considerable added sugar.

If a product has health stars on it it's probably not that good for you.
HEALTH STAR RATINGS ARE SELF RATED BY THE COMPANIES WHICH MAKE THE PRODUCTS. 


 I can't stress how important this is. The whole scheme is bs.  


A company puts protein in a apricot and kumqaut cake and it's now the most nutritious apricot and kumquat cake in the supermarket which they can use to then justify the 5 stars they award themselves with.


I worked for a company which had a 5 star rated 500 calorie single serving 12 teaspoon of sugar drink this is what they told me when I complained over the rating of our product.
Yeah slight exaggeration but it's 6.6g per 100ml for a 250ml drink. 

"Up&Go is reasonably healthy given its macronutrients and ingredients."

I'd like to see a dietician read this with a straight face.
But defeats the whole purpose because of the vast amounts of sugar they have in them. 

That's like saying, ice cream is made out of eggs, cream and milk so it's high in protein, but then completely ignoring the sugar that goes into ice-cream. And then just having a Berocca for the vitamins listed and going, yeah that makes it healthy.
Damn. The education around food in this country is extremely lacking isn't it.
I know, that's what I'm getting at. The whole thing is a sham. I always laugh when I see a 4.5 star rating on a loaf of white bread that literally has no nutritional value whatsoever.
Idk as a teen trying to bulk that sugar and protien has been a blessing if anything
Hilarious that you say that because when I was underweight, my dietician was recommending that I drink 3 Up&Gos per day for the additional calories. They are also regularly used as meal replacement drinks.

Not everything with a bit of extra sugar is a death sentence, you know? There’s so many other factors that go into nutrition. Please educate yourself before making unchecked claims.
But we aren’t comparing up and go to ice cream, you’re comparing it to other breakfast drinks (I think)

To use your ice cream analogy, you would have to compare similar ice creams - ice creams lower in sugar and lower in fat would rate better than those with more sugar and fat.

Breakfast cereal is probably the clearest example. Corn Flakes exist in the same category as Sultana Bran and Frosties. Sultana Bran is 4.5 stars, Frosties are 2 stars and Corn Flakes are 3.5 stars.

My Leggos double concentrate pizza sauce is 4 stars. Nobody is saying two tablespoons of concentrated tomato is healthier then corn flakes, it’s just that there might be other concentrated tomato paste on the market that has more added sugar or salt
Berocca doesn't have sugar, it has artificial sweeteners.  

"Vast amounts" is a bit of a stretch, Up & Go has about 1/2 the sugar of a coke, or about the same or less than an orange juice.
Sugar is not the devil Gordon ramsey.
Sugar don't help bulk fool
As a teen. Yeah that only goes so far.
Jesus christ. Again, didn't make the claim that it was a death sentence or alluded to such, or denied they weren't used as meal replacements. 

Working in disability literally put together these kinds of supplemental dietary requirements for people because they weren't able to eat solids. 

Sorry I forget everyone loses their shit now on the internet over the slightest bit of criticism over something they enjoy.
I'm comparing ingredients with ingredients. I was a chef so food was my job for a long time and I know how make foods from scratch. You know multiple foods are made with the exact same ingredients that aren't in the same food category yeah?
Never said Berocca had sugar. I said use that to add the vitamin supplements. 

Why are people getting so bent out of shape over over this highly processed sugary drink.
Literally never said it was but what ever you have to tell yourself to get through the morning on an up and go I guess.
Yes, but the star rating system only compares foods in the same category
> I know how make foods from scratch

Yes, so you’d know that you can make chocolate cake with different types of ingredients- some with more sugar than others, some with oil, some with butter. Some with flour, some flourless.

The Heath Star ratings are comparing the different types of chocolate cake against each other, it’s not comparing chocolate cake to pizza, just because both have flour and sugar, nor is it comparing it to a chocolate milkshake
All you are doing is complaining about the sugar content. If you don't want it, that's fine. But as far as processed breakfasts go, you could do worse.
I know what the health star system is trying to do. It's just failing miserably at it.

It's ok, you can go out and buy your up and gos in the morning without judgement, I promise.
I swear people are really struggling with comprehension tonight and really trying to justify their own eating habits as if I actually care what you eat. 

It's started with me just criticising the star rating system and literally everyone cracking the shits and saying " you can't tell me what to eat! I'll eat what I want! It's fucking healthy ok!" 

Haha, Jesus christ.
> I know what the health star system is trying to do. It's just failing miserably at it.

I don’t disagree. At the very least it should tell it what product family it’s compared against and there should be a database online so I can look up/sort all products in that group if I’m looking for a healthier choice
The only one struggling is you. You think because you used to be a chef you are the authority on what is healthy or not? Chucking a tanty because people have a different opinion.

Just know I'm going to buy 5 up and go's tomorrow just to piss you off. Night chef.
Hahaha. I've never said any of this whatsoever or in anyway throwing a tantrum. 

Oh no.....Don't buy up and gos.....please.....how will I sleep!
