Hi! Im not sure what to do about it and how can i check if anything has happened. Im pretty sure a scammer has had access to my 3 y.o sons birth certificate. Obviously theres our names and his name and our address. And document numbers. 
Please no lectures about scam safety etc. this was not my doing. 
Consult [IDCare.org](http://IDCare.org)
A 3 yo can’t sign anything, can’t create accounts, get a loan etc etc. 

Only a crook playing the very long game is going to wait fifteen years for a payoff.
Birth certificates have the suburb and state; not the full *address*.
Outlandish as it sounds, and please, I hope I'm wrong and it cannot be done...

What if they're using the birth certificate to get a passport for a child to get them out of the country? Could that be possible?
If you suspect a birth certificate is being mis-used , report it to your state / territory Births, Deaths and marriages registry
My kid’s has full address. Perhaps it differs by state.
NSW has the name and address of the witnesses which are usually the parents. Also on the back of the certificate is the current address if they mail it out.
That would still be tricky. They would need id in the parents names because to get a child a passport the parent/s need to sign or you may need a court order. You could fake the passports for both child and parent but you wouldn't bother getting a real birth certificate for it.
Looked at mine and my kids, NSW, hospital/suburb only.
Yes, I can see that point. It's very peculiar to take a child's birth certificate and use it. But what for 🤷🏼‍♀️
Same in .W.A, it's the suburb of the hospital, not the suburbs you are living in and this is what's shown in passport.
The scammers may just take everything they can. Sometimes they strike gold and sometimes it's a total dud. Kinda like when a burglar breaks into a home. That bracelet on the beside table may be cheap crap bought at the market or it maybe 24k gold.

We don't know how the scammer got the child's birth certificate. Obviously it would be more valuable if they got an adult's birth certificate and other details such as a driver licence but still tricky.
