I’ve often read about how LinkedIn is full of scam recruiters in America and is not worth creating an account, so I was wondering if this is the same in Aus? 

Australians, what has been your experience with LinkedIn? Are certain professions more/less relevant for the platform?

This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
If you’re looking for work in certain tech and IT sectors you can’t avoid it. I’ve got my last three jobs after being cold contacted by recruiters on LI. I was sending out plenty of CVs but the jobs I actually got were from LI. 

Grit your teeth and use it while looking for a job, but it’s worthless otherwise.
Depends on which industry you're in. I think it's worthwhile for corporate roles. It serves as a digital CV. It's the first thing that pops up if you were to Google my name. Can't hurt to have one though if it broadens your job search.


Having said that, there are a lot of scammy recruiters and every other post on it is wanky as hell. 


Don't bother paying for the premium service though.
Worth having but not worth using if that makes sense. Lots of poaching occurs on it but I might go on it to see posts like once a fortnight at best bc most the time it’s just people dribbling about shit that doesn’t matter
[https://www.reddit.com/r/LinkedInLunatics/](https://www.reddit.com/r/LinkedInLunatics/)
It's a giant corporate circle jerk.
Yes, absolutely, but it's a bit industry-specific. For corporate (tech/finance/etc, great), others not so much. I get messages from recruiters all the time, and have landed 2 of my last 5 full-time jobs through LinkedIn. You would be silly to not use it. I have no idea what u/fletch44 is talking about.

You don't need to use the social part of LinkedIn (posts and commenting). Just fill out your profile and connect with people.
I have it and might have a quick look once in a while

It has some jobs that might not be listed on Seek, otherwise I find its also good for a laugh. Dunno what it is about it exactly, but its got a unique sort of cringe factor to it thanks to some users.
hate it, but need it
Moat of the time, LinkedIn is people posting thought leadership comments on thought leadership pieces on other people's posts that they used chatgpt to write.

It is great for following companies that you like to get info on them though. Plus, if you apply for a job, check out the hiring managers profile. It'll ping then and they'll check out yours, giving you a tiny bit more recognition than the next person.
I am completely biased as I'm a headhunter, but I genuinely don't understand why you wouldn't want to have a profile on linkedin.

You don't even need to actually go on the site often.  Just have a profile with some of your professional experience on there and connect to a few people in your sector, and just leave it at that.

You will get some spam, but you also might get a message in your inbox offering you your dream job.

You don't need to engage with the news feed if your don't want to.  You don't have to message anyone.  You don't need to really use it at all.  You just keep your profile there and you never know.
It's just Facebook for corporate psychopaths abd narcissists.

The company itself have been grossly anticonsumer in the past, refusing to stop spamming non-members with invites and reminders if their email address shows up in any contact list that members had on their devices.
I’ve found it useful, got my last two jobs on it
Keep as much personal dets off it as possible just what's required. You can give your cv with address dob etc when you're sure a recruiter is legit.
Personally I can't stand it. It was good in the early days but by about 2005 people were linking with people they barely knew and it became a tool for recruiters instead of a platform for peer networking.

I keep my account hibernated unless I'm applying for jobs because it gives up far too much personal info to anyone browsing. I can see it being useful when seeking a new job though.
Personally, I haven't found it that useful. I'm a librarian though, and that's pretty far removed from the career fields other commenters have mentioned benefitting from it. It's never hurt me; it's just never helped me.
I got my current job through it. Constantly getting contacted by recruiters too
I deleted mine after Microsoft bought it and have had no issues with getting work. When I was on it I found that recruiters never reached out to me, the ones I reached out to were often never working for the company their profile said they were working at.


They'd promise to let me know when they had work for me, I may have gotten contacted once, from a recruiter in my old state.. 


I also found that anything on my profile would just as easily fit on a resume (that I would then have to fill out manually whatever company's website when I would apply anyway...)


Job applications are a joke now and the site doesn't offer any value, not to mention all the corporate bootlicking that some of the people do on there.
If you are mid-senior and above or looking to get into mid-senior roles I would say it’s almost mandatory. You don’t need to do much with it, put your experience in and switch on Open to Work. Recruiters will reach out to you, about half will ghost after the first mass message, then you move forward if there’s a role of interest, making sure to be nice and honest to the recruiter if you’re not interested (tell them what would make you move, if they have something else they’ll try put you forward. That’s how I’ve gotten 2 of my last 3 jobs and more than doubled my salary in 3 years.
If you’re in the tech/corporate world than I think it’s almost necessary to have for recruiters to reach out to you and to act as a page for recruiters/employers to look at before your resume. But don’t actually use it as a social network, only use it to setup your profile/look for jobs/talk to recruiters.

And yes there are spam/scam recruiters but you will just have to filter them out manually.
It's full of bullshit. I closed my account after about 6 months when I started getting endorsements for skills I didn't have, from people who I knew, but who wouldn't know about my skillsets.

I suspect they were encouraged to give me an endorsement for a vaguely-related skillset, in order to increase their karma within linkedin, e.g. "Cindy has given ol-gormsby an endorsement for MS-SQL" - I had zero experience with MS-SQL, but Cindy would get karma points for the endorsement.
Nope.
Pointless IMO
Don't pay for premium. I use the free version as a place to Network and have a lot of trades and suppliers reach out to me there.
Does anyone know how after I signed up with 1 email address they got ahold of several of my email addresses even though I didn’t give them to them this is really disturbing
I have an account, I last used it in 2018 while changing job, I have not use it since, it also did not get me the job, I did that.

So... no, useless for most professions, probably useful for niche industry like programming, data security, recruitments (corporate leeches) and other types of business that needs a lot of ass kissing and self fellatio.
I'm a building consultant and I find it extremely helpful to keep up with new products, seminars etc. It's also the first place real jobs get posted for my industry.

I think you need to be in niches for it to be helpful.
I've been headhunted twice on Linkedin. Both were genuine. IMO it's just a case of your mileage ~~may~~ will vary.
100% important. I personally wouldn't hire anyone without a linkedin profile
Fuck ye. This is how to connect and up yourself to a better job.
When I started linked in 13-14 years ago it was fairly low key, used for connection building. These days it’s full of narcissistic self promoting digital dickwads
I got my current AND previous job from Linkedin ads. Seek with full of recruiter ads and useless ghost ads, LinkedIn at least worked for me.

I get reached out from recruiter once or twice a month, so that too is worth keeping the profile up to date.
I'm am having more fun than a grown man ought to be allowed to have on LinkedIn. I'm connecting to people all over the world who are involved in the solutions to climate change, which is my primary focus right now.

I am 61 and unemployable, but I have gotten so much great information and connections on LinkedIn.

I can't see why you wouldn't want to be on LinkedIn.
I got my current job offered via Linkedin, peak Covid when I was in an industry heavily affected and scared of losing my job every day (tourism). Absolutely saved my ass.
Depends on your industry, if you aren’t the type to move around and network with narcissists it probably isn’t worth it.

I’ve been headhunted for interviews a couple of times via linkedin and I don’t bother with premium.
I'm in tech and got my last job through LinkedIn. I think it's worth it. I regularly have calls with legit recruiters who cold call me for opportunities. Maybe it's the type of work I do or the industry, I'm not sure. You have nothing to lose by creating an account
Useful for job hunting and keeping track of people you've worked with to see where they end up, but that's about it.

Full of wank, Facebook-style posts and loads of scammy recruiters or people who send you a connection request so that they can flog a product to you.
LI is great for work Facebook, but for the love of God please do not overshare.

There's a sub for that,
If corporate, yeah, unfortunately.
I got my last two jobs from it from people doing keyword searches on it...

Just like all social media just be aware, but at this point the only real reason I keep my LinkedIn on is they have daily games and Queen is so good.
My job feed lately has been full of "Work from home - data entry - basic typing skills needed". Hmmm, are they sending you a carton of paper documents to enter in a database? More likely some pyramid scam.
I think LinkedIn is worth it. Just be warned that there are people trying to lure you into MLMs. [It happened to me](https://www.reddit.com/r/fiaustralia/comments/1dr788z/is_financial_independence_achievable_for_most/), and had I not abandoned the business coaching when I realised it's an MLM, I would have been screwed.
LinkedIn has never been of any significant help with my career, though it is a convenient way to stay in touch with former colleagues. What it is really useful for is identifying the sort of gullible idiot who (a) believes daft conspiracy theories and (b) posts such delusional nonsense on a career web site. Think of it as a handy tool for spotting people you would rather not work with.
I've got two jobs through it, one from a target ad, one from just seeing an old colleague who posted that she was looking to hire.

I work in engineering.

It's a really handy tool for staying in touch with old colleagues and seeing from them when jobs come up. And I do find that the algorithms for recommending jobs are pretty good too.
I used it during my last job search and secured a few interviews from the jobs advertised there, although I ended up going with a role I found on Seek. I am a civil engineer and there were plenty of jobs and useful recruiters on there for my field. 

The social media aspect I do not like and have not used at all since opening my account ~5 years ago.
I don't know if it's seniority or industry but as a senior  manager in finance nothing good has come from it for me. All of the cold approaches have been for junior roles. The job listings have no salary attached therefore SEEK is better for job hunting. I only have an account so I don't seem like a "boomer" that's off the grid and doesn't do social media.....which I am, just dont tell anyone.
Australia based, work on SE Asia Oil and Gas development projects. Got into offshore/international work solely through reestablishing contact with people I'd worked with ages ago through LI.

I don't participate in the brand building and brave, honest sharing circlejerk though.
If you keep it purely for work contacts and job opportunities, then yes. Some people maintain it like it’s an instagram/facebook page to make others envious of their lives and jobs, and just post streams of bullshit.
In construction its well used - especially in commercial building.  I've scored great, long term, legitimate roles off being approached in LI.
Nope, I live regional and keep getting notified about State wide jobs. And the cost is ridiculous.
Late to this, but it becomes handy at funny times. Just use it as a living, breathing CV and add every pro contact you've ever had. If you're ever laid off or have a business idea, you can message your contacts for leads.
I think there's a fine print to those who have found it useful; they already had the experience and connections to begin with and were able to leverage those assets into the roles they have now. For people like myself who've graduated with a degree and are trying to break into IT at the junior/entry-level, I haven't found it useful despite following all the common knowledge and wisdom from tailoring resumes/CVs, applying directly to companies, jazzing up your LinkedIn profile with the correct keywords for the algorithm, getting in contact with recruiters, hiring managers or those working in the industries or roles you want to be a part of, etc. I eventually threw in that towel as I just wasn't getting anywhere with it.
I think it’s worth while, you will occasionally find some genuine unique job opportunities on there. 

Admittedly there are also opportunities on there which can be over hyped or may simply be a scam.
I only use Linkdin I find it better than the others imo
It's a great way to build up a professional profile if your posts and opinions are authentic and not "agree?" Or AI powered crap.

My profile URL is my industry vertical as one word, which definitely gets noticed on CVs. Something along the lines of LinkedIn.com/in/SaaS or LinkedIn.com/in/architecture
I SEO’d my profile to appease the algorithm so it would feed me jobs I might like or be qualified for. I found this a huge time saver and exposed me to industries and companies I wouldn’t have come across otherwise.

I got my current job through LinkedIn purely because the algorithm surfaced it.

Echoing what others have said, this is specific to Tech. Each industry typically have a preferred job board.
90% of it is just a circlejerk, but I've found it useful for building what amounts to a more detailed CV than the ones I typically send potential employers.

I work in a smallish industry in Australia and having it so that anyone can look up my name and see who I've worked for and what projects I've worked on has been very helpful. It has led to beneficial conversations, the kind that start with "Hey, you worked at <XXX>, did you know <YYY>?"

It's also really helpful for researching potential future colleagues and interviewers. Being able to see your potential bosses employment history and potentially interrogate former coworkers of theirs as well as develop some targeted questions for them in an interview has gotten me over the line for a job recently.
I've used it a bit over the years mostly for connecting with peers but of late it's been a great researching tool for pieces of work I'm on to see SME's views on topics, articles on a range of topics that apply to me and piecing together things I might need to do to further my career (I snoop profiles of people that I admire or want to emulate in my career, particularly their work history and education section to sus out different stepping stones). 
I like keeping tabs on the different jobs across public and private sector in my field but that part of LinkedIn is a bit clunky on the mobile app but serves its purpose for how I use it. 

I've used premium before after my redundancy but didn't get much value out of it so cancelled it pretty quickly. 

For those that can complete online courses no worries, LinkedIn learning is pretty good but I'm not like that and had so many started but not finished courses because I'd get too busy and forget or I'd loose interest.
Useful. Have applied and got a couple of jobs through it. Also good for keeping in touch with colleagues
I'm not a recruiter, but I've used it to hire someone.

I needed someone for a highly specialised role and did not receive any suitable applications via Seek/Indeed. I saw a post that was technical and relevant from someone with the right background so I messaged them.
I have got all my jobs in Australia without LinkedIn. Last one 4 years ago during the peak of Covid. They remembered me from an engineering meet in 2019 and I got a call from them in August 2020 and they offered me 20k more than what I was getting in my current job + Bonus and other benefits. LinkedIn a social media CV to display out your skills and experience and connect with other employers and get reference from past employers. I have seen some blokes even mention what they did in their high school summer camp which is hilarious. Once a recruiter asked me if I have LinkedIn so that it’s easier for them to connect with my previous employers. I told them if I get an offer of employment, they’d get all the details of my past employers, before that I’m not bothering them. They hired me anyway, they needed what I got that time and they did the employment check through official emails and phone numbers of my past employers and peers. There are people with very fancy LinkedIn but don’t  get hired even after several tries. It all depends on what you have got and how useful it is in today’s world. Doesn’t hurt to have one, but I’m doing fine without one.
I got my current job through Linkedin. I’m pretty sure for the IT industry it’s a necessity if you want to progress your career.
I work in recruitment for a tech company. I fill probably 50 - 60% of my roles from backend searching and cold approaching candidates. With that being said, I look at it more as a detailed resume search tool (and the open to work feature is great) and really dislike the LinkedIn circlejerk culture
i’m just starting out so maybe i’m not the best one to answer but so far it’s been good to make connections when you meet someone new in the industry, getting jobs tho— not so much lol
I mean its been good with finding me jobs but.... I'm still unemployed after 1.5 years, don't think it is LinkedIn's fault however. There is a lack of jobs for a guy looking to get started in games development like me.
Use it as a resume. Update it when you're looking for a job, unsubscribe from emails, ignore recruiters. If companies are struggling to hire or keep talent enough to need recruiters, they're not worth working for. 
I’m on it. It is great for networking. I like looking at the competition also. I wouldn’t use it to get a job. I also like learning about new initiative things to. I’m in the construction industry.
LinkedIn is widely used in Australia across many industries, especially in tech, finance, marketing, and recruitment. It’s a great tool for building your professional network, connecting with colleagues, and staying updated on industry trends.
The only substantial thing that site has done for me recently was recommend the people that fired me nearly a decade ago as connections.


Uh... no.
Recruiters can be good not sure why they get so much hate, they can potentially offer you a job you may prefer or get more money in. If you are not interested cool say no. I’m not sure about recruiters scamming either how would this possibly work?
I have doubled my salary twice by speaking with recruiters on LinkedIn. The first time, the job I got wasn’t even advertised.
Got all my jobs through LinkedIn being contacted by recruiters and never experienced any scam. How do you even scam on LinkedIn?
I’m in the metal trades so being someone on the tools I thought I was not their target user. A boilermakers of all people told me that it’s his go to place for job hunting instead of seek. Decided to make a profile and discovered exactly what I thought. I’ve gotten a handful of messages over the years but nothing targeted to me specifically. If you’re a white collar worker then yeah there might be a point to it but not in my field
I used to be like pfft whatever but LinkedIn is actually pretty good, think of it as a second resume in the form of a social media feed. Whenever I complete a project I like to take some screenshots of some data it produced and put up a post and a spiel along with it “not everyone has access to clean water but with the rest of my team at water co we have helped blah blah blah” 

You might not get the interaction but that’s not the point, the point is that some recruiter for a job you actually want might look at it one day and you hold credibility over a lot of other applicants because your work is documented and you can prove over time that you have been achieving outcomes. 

It’s also handy on the conference circuit so that people Don’t get your personal number or work email, they have to message you on a platform which is actually not that great at that kind of interaction
People in this post saying “it’s good to have as a CV but not bothered to use” are the first ones to get selected out of most recruitment processes I’ve been involved in.

As already mentioned, it’s a must have for tech and corporate jobs but I would go a step further. If you don’t maintain it properly you are just another one. In the current market climate hiring managers receive hundreds if not thousands of applications thanks to LinkedIn “apply with one click” feature. Unfortunately that raises the bar and add a lot of noise, so working in your personal brand and stand out in there are great ways to progress in your career and build connections.

For example I was very active on LinkedIn and writing articles there. Have 15 years of experience in tech, all my jobs (5 or so) came from LinkedIn in some form. After I got my current job I was so busy that I had to stop using for a couple years, 3 weeks ago I went back posting and in my first 3 weeks I received countless invites for networking events, a job offer to be a C-level on a medium size startup and offered to co-author a book.

So yeah not just use it but use property otherwise you are part of the noise.
Some people take it seriously but I think it is crap.  All social media including Reddit is crap.  

If you are selling B2B you must have a Linkedin account.  I have always had one but would look only a few times yearly.  But now I check once a week or so.
The free version is worth it in Australia, especially if your field is tech related.

I know friends who keep it updated and share the odd update to their career and article. When they didn't it was time to move on they changed their status to 'Open to jobs.' Within a few days had an offer.
It’s a hot mess with people posting egotistic stories. But yes you can use it to find a job.
It’s kind of necessary in most corporate jobs, especially if you’re ambitious. Not worth paying for premium, obviously.
LinkedIn is absolutely worth it. Especially for personal brand building. I've had a ton of recruiters reach out to me with jobs and I've gotten some through them.
As soon as I could, I got off it. I'd get back on if it was essential to my career or industry, but in mine, it's mostly people wanting to "connect" just to give a banal sales pitch.
I got my job through LinkedIn, and we use LinkedIn to find possible recruits.

It's worth having.
I just deleted mine it’s so self absorbed and cringe.
You'd be shooting yourself in the foot if you don't keep it up to date. You don't need it when you start off but as your network grows it becomes more important
I find it’s useful to stay in touch with business colleagues and friends, plus to be found by relevant business associates. I haven’t found it overly spammy.
The only thing LinkedIn is good for is broadcasting you have top security clearance.
From my experience your international experience will not matter to the people hiring in Australia. They  want Australian work related experience. 
So you will have to do freelance work before anyone will hire you. Maybe they will hire or maybe not.
Assholes are not region locked.
That is the reason I'm no longer on it and that was a few decades ago.
Science jumped there after Twitter went down hill. But it doesn’t vibe for me personally
LinkedIn is just Facebook for work connections. 

No, it’s not worth it. 

If you’re looking for a job, go to a job-search website.
Not worth it at all.
If you are just starting out it can be worth it to build a network. If you are already senior or established definitely don't bother.
LinkedIn is a hot garbage social media platform these days with tons of virtual signalling, men hating from women (the amount of men hate on Linkedin is astounding tbh, you would think every man is abusive, and stopped every woman from the lofty heights of CEO, CFO and COO positions with the way females and effeminated men carry on Linkedin), and recruiters trying to get their next pay cheque by convincing you to change jobs.

For some industries, it is the best way to find a new job and I know at my current job they check most people's LinkedIn's that they work with on projects or job applicants.

My experience is its a bunch of people circle jerking each other; but with a tinge of professionalism.

Somehow my mobile got linked to my Linkedin in some recruiter data base (assuming my email/name got linked) and having people call you up to try convince you of the wonders of changing your job was annoying for awhile.
I've used it to get my last 2 jobs but if you use it regularly you are a psyhco.
Shithouse. Recieve promotional messages only as a jobseeker that is actively (and frustratingly) looking. Probably different if you have in demand skills and are headhunted.
It's hot garbage. Keep it on hibernate unless your new employer wants to check it, and then back to hibernate.
No
It's a digital resume. Yes it is wanky, but it's how you play the game. It's how I hire people. I question if people don't have a LinkedIn.
And as you build out your network (by just adding people you meet at/through work), you’ll eventually find that when you go to move companies it’s not uncommon to find connections at the place you want to go.
This is the most apt description here. It's basically a pool for recruiters to wank on you from a great height so they can make their money.

They really are the REA's of humans.
Were you maintaining any sort of active presence on LinkedIn to have fallen under their radar? I'm looking to increase my employability too after having sent out hundreds of resume's but not hearing back.
Just avoid the circlejerk wanktoast on there and you'll be fine
I'm an electrician, and LinkedIn has been great for me. When a large company needs a technician or someone with hands-on experience they will use their more white collar recruitment techniques.
on that premium thing, i got a year free during uni and then after that have had no reason to ever get it again
Yep…digital handjobs
Absolutely, monkey spankers.
Amen
And really you don't want to work for dickhead companies who want   to force you to  maintain a LinkedIn or Facebook account.  To me this is up there in stupidity with companies and tradespeople who only advertise on Facebook and expect customers to open a Facebook account because they are too stupid or lazy to be smart business people. 

The world is so small with the Internet these days, LinkedIn is rather irrelevant and has no importance to anyone's career. You are not trying to find a rocket engineer in the Simpson Desert whose contact details you cant find anywhere else.

LinkedIn is more about commercialising and collecting peoples private data  for market power and profit. In my mind  companies  and governments who do this are not working to foster open data and open systems.   Its so stupid how academic, engineering, standards and all sorts of information is being hijacked  by people who want you to pay to access this information when it should be freely available.  Its good to see many universities are starting to form organisation that publish research and information that anyone can access rather than locking it away with fees and charges. Why encourage people who want to lock up data.
I dunno, I'm in Finance in insurance as an Underwriter, and holy shit the about of utter tripe that gets sent to me as a result.

I will certainly not click on that bitly link and do the needful in uploading all my documents for a background check so that you can be presenting to me your offers.
[removed]
I'm not on it.


At the start I was put off as a few idiots I worked with asked me to connect with them.


Generally the only people who have mentioned LinkedIn in person to me have been people I wouldn't give my phone number to so I've just avoided it, and I very rarely give it any thought.
It's crazy to me how anti-LinkedIn people are in this post. It is the bare minimal effort required to maintain your profile, and you are showing you can't be bothered doing that, while other candidates are.
I agree, I don't actively use LinkedIn, just maintain my profile when I change roles, and I got a genuine message from a recruiter with a legit role just this morning. I'd say most of the recruiter messages are spam or people who haven't actually read my profile properly, but the genuine ones are usually pretty easy to spot.
Do people honestly ever answer you on LinkedIn. I see people offering me jobs all the time on LinkedIn. But I assume that if they are offering ME a job then they must be dodgy scammers. I get that you are not a scammer but your messages will be read in the exact same way as a scammer so do you just get ignored most of the time?
Not entirely wrong, but I never got job offers just by having a Facebook account. You don’t actually need to use LinkedIn, just set up a profile and recruiters will come to you with jobs if your skillset is in demand. Granted, they are mostly shit and not worth responding to, but sometimes it’s worthwhile.
LinkedIn has been acquired by Microsoft in 2016
RIP LINKEDIN LIBRARIANS!
Cheeky Cindy!
So funny haha! Hey don’t say you’re unemployable! I’m sure you’ve got LOADS of experience that employers would want!
We won’t tell anyone … non-boomer! That’s so odd that LinkedIn doesn’t disclose salary rates?
Most people who talk about their top security clearance have baseline, and look confused when you mention NV1/2 or PV
Which you shouldn't be broadcasting anyway. At all.
Psycho?
Yep, completely agree with that.

I’ve also found that out of the 1000+ connections. There’s also a number of genuinely good recruiters that I keep in touch with every now and then.

With what the tech industry is like these days. It’s good to keep some sort of contact just incase.
For some reason the "from a great height" part made me reverse snort laugh. Actual snot shot out of my nose.
Corporate orgy.
lol... I love that. 

Monkeys all the way down...
Australian standards is one that springs to mind and it really shits me
That's like saying 'you should hire me because I'm so good and I don't need to prove it to you'. Maintaining a LinkedIn profile is very similar to having a tailored resume, or writing a cover letter. It doesn't mean anything about your competency, but it does show you are willing to put in the minimal required effort to try and secure the role.

You're right, the world is small, so you need to advertise yourself and LinkedIn is a great way that really doesn't take much effort. I'm in the tech industry and it has definitely helped me jump roles.
Your [comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/1ekldu0/is_linkedin_worth_it_in_australia/lgujtms/?context=3) in /r/australia was automatically removed because you used a URL shortener or content cache.

These are not permitted in /r/australia as they impair our ability to enforce link blacklists.

Please re-post your comment using direct, full-length URL's only.


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Yeah I don't understand it.

Spend 10 minutes a year updating your profile, and in exchange people will put job offers in front of you.....

Worst case scenario is you now know what other companies will pay for your skills in preparation for your next salary review.
some of the comments here are so dumb and overdramatic. it's like saying you won't have an email account because of junk/spam emails.

yes, there's dumb shit on there but that's just a part of it.
You have to remember this is r/australia, most people here are unemployed and strongly against any advice that might help them get a job.
I get about a 10% response rate.  Which frankly I think is pretty damn good.  Sure a lot of those responses are no thanks type responses, but I definitely get responses.  I also get a lot of late replies, eg I get a message saying something like "Sorry I didn't respond 7 months ago, but if you have a role like this now I could be interested"

All that said my messages are very specific to the person, explain the role in detail, and ask them whether it is worth having a chat about.

Roughly it would look like this:

Hi Dumbname,

I was hoping to find a time we could talk as I have an opportunity with a Social Media company in their content creation team based in Sydney.  You would be working on a mixture of Australian specific content, western content and a smaller amount of migration content.  The role is primarily text based in a casual thread based communication platform.

One thing that could appeal is you have been engaged in one of their flagship channels r/australia.  This role would give you the scope to see some of the inside workings of the channel and have an opportunity to be involved in the long term direction.  

They have recently gone to IPO which has raised significant funds for expansion, and with the largest database of user generated text content in the world they have a significant asset for developing future LLM and AI projects.

They have strong retention and have a clearly defined professional development program.  You would work in a team with highly experience senior content creators that will be available to you to develop your skills, and also have junior creators to mentor.

What would they need to offer for you to entertain a conversation?

Kind regards,

  
Harlequin
I feel so lucky to work in an industry where people seek us out by word of mouth and industry reputation, instead of having to be a part of that swirling cesspool of unbearable twats.
My experience is unusual and intangible. Like 25 years of being involved in men's groups gives me certain powers that don't show up on a resume.

But I just decided build a business instead. I get to choose who I am working with that way instead.

I'd be happy to connect with you if you want to shoot me a pm with your LinkedIn profile.

I am almost never a svammer and only sell bitcoin on alternative Thursdays in months that end in R.
Clearly.
Doh
What do you mean by that penultimate sentence?
Well it is probably one of the most cringe inducing corners of the internet - "I just finished up working at Fucktard and Fuckwit and am so thankful for the opportunity. Today's office...THE BEACH! But first...coffee".
Reddit is just full of lazy and unambitious people, so they intrinsically hate LinkedIn because it makes them look like shit, tall poppy syndrome. I do acknowledge there are still cringe posts on there, though, but it's part of the game.
Yeah if I got that message I would still assume you were a scammer purely on the basis that it was sent to me
I've never been on it, and am very happy being that way.


I've got 10 years experience in a very in demand sector though, so I realise I'm not the norm.


I skip industry events and work events too. Happy to further my work knowledge in my own time as I enjoy what I do and need to keep current. I just hate people.
Let me try to break it down for you.

What I was trying to say is that out of the many people I'm connected too on LinkedIn, there are some recruiters that I talk to sometimes.

With how things are in the tech world, it’s good to stay in touch just in case you need to look for other opportunities.
Sure I guess.

Depends on your industry.  I specialise in consulting engineers, so if I'm messaging someone it will be specific to their background with a role in their industry.  It's not going to be a general spam to all.
Sounds ai as fuck
Let me clarify my question: how are things in the tech world? It sounds like it’s negative? Is that right?
Every "job offer" I have ever received through linkedin was very specific to my industry and role. I still don't believe that a single one was a genuine offer.
There are a lot of bad or boring  jobs out there. And the good, much less boring  jobs  have high retention.
Dude still doesn't get it 🤔
Why?  Did you look at the profile of the person who sent you the message?  I don't understand why you would assume they were all scammers.
Correct. That is why I am asking.
What part of this is confusing to you? I am an IT grunt. I am not the sort of person to be head hunted. No one needs an IT person that badly. If you want someone to do IT work for you ask the first person you see on the street. Chances are they can do it.
IT sector in 2024 is filled with low-effort talent willing to work any roles trying to benefit off “IT/Cyber/Cloud” as a WFH or get-rich-quick strategy, or sometimes you’ll find dedicated, hard working and genuinely attentive contractors that want you to succeed in addition to getting paid.

Some recruiters specialise in throwing large numbers of staff at a problem and are hired to brute force tasks. 
Others specialise in a small number of highly skilled tools for the right job. 

Some recruiters don’t care if you’re happy and will attempt to maximise their profit margin by asking for pay increases and not passing them on to you. Others will be transparent and advocate for your rights and care if you’re happy in your role and find you other opportunities if you’re not.

Who anyone chooses to represent them by offering their skills should be good at their own job. Getting opportunities for you that match your skillset and not just coldcalling random companies asking to take an IT orphan in for a few bucks. A reputation for doing good work, being good at treating people well and caring about building long term relationships.

If and when you find those recruiters, you absolutely keep them on your radar and take them out for coffee occasionally even if you go with a competitor because you never know when they might have access to your dream job and let you know if you don’t keep in touch.
I think the moment has passed mate
I have worked in recruitment for over 20 years, including stints in IT Recruitment.

It is hard to find good help desk people. Let alone anyone with any skills. I feel like you are under selling yourself rather than anything else.
Nah dude. Help desk is the job you do when you can't get a job cleaning. Help desk is exactly the sort of role that absolutely any random could do easily. It is a role you give to the new recruits until they show skill in a different area. I currently am focused on change management which makes help desk look hard by comparison.
