
Nice of them to openly acknowledge that those minimum English standard tests for entry, are the complete joke we all knew they were...
That's insane if true.
It's interesting because it seems they thought it was okay because it was the discussion between teacher and student rather than a direct tutorial of sorts. 

Which is quite unfortunate, the overall dialogue and conversation is very important for learning at university, being able to communicate with your professor and classmates, listen to the questions your classmates ask that you may not have thought of, etc are integral to the collaborative part of learning.

If domestic students have to have a study score of at least 25 in English / Literature to qualify for these courses, it should be that international students are also held to the same standard and are capable of fluently speaking English and also communicating in English literately via the written word, it should not be that conversations are being held in different languages because people are struggling with English.
is there any particular reason that Chinese students take the hassle of coming here to study? are Chinese university's packed? is it just cheaper? or are we accepting the students who were not accepted into more "prestigious" schools.
There was a HRM tut (master degree) at USYD few years ago, where the tutor and students are all Chinese students, and it ended up conversing in Mandarin (not a student of them but known about it)

It should be fixed asap
This is guaranteed to generate a shitstorm.
Our degree factories for overseas students doing this? I am shocked, shocked I tell you.
This has been happening for years. A friend told me they were in a class at Monash. There were only two people who didn’t speak Chinese so…tough shit. 

ETA: would be 15 or so years ago. 
I did architecture at UNSW and a lot of the mandarin speaking students went with one particular tutor for final year design studio (each tutor ran a slightly different project for final year and the idea was to pick based on your interests)… he was an Aussie local and didn’t speak a word of any Chinese language. The look of despair on their faces when they realised 😬
Our lecturer gave us practice exams in Chinese (ANU Economics). When we asked her to translate them into English she asked why since they were Chinese papers and we're just an example of how the exam would be structured. Turns out she didn't want to translate them because the questions were the same.
I have a friend who is a professor at uni on the east coast. He came to Australia as an international student too and worked his ass off to get to where he is today. He's in hot water because he's refused bribes from international students. The problem with that is, upon his refusal, they report him for biased marking etc. which requires an investigation that takes months and goes through several chairs. At the end of it all when he's not been found guilty of misconduct, the students gets to re-enroll in his unit, and the matter of them offering him bribes doesn't even get investigated. Absolutely fucked.
What Australia has done to the education and science sectors is absolutely criminal. 

Australia, where everything is for sale. Even our self-respect.
Happened at USYD too circa 2007-2014. 

Depending on the class and subjects, classes with many Chinese students with a Chinese tutor who can barely speak English, they end up all speaking Chinese to one another.

Mind you I can speak Chinese but that's not what I paid for when I came to study in Australia. I paid to learn in English, to learn to operate and do things the Australian way, not the Mainland Chinese way. 

This whole Chinese deal at Australian universities is bad for locals and other international students who actually want to do things the right way.
In 1989 Computer Science at Sydney Uni started running first year tutorials in Mandarin (in parallel to English tutorials).

They ran for a week, but then someone (me) reported them to the science (CS was part of science back then) faculty, and they got shut down.

It’s not a new thing.
Something similar happened to me in a Database  systems class about ten years ago. A fill in lecturer wasn't doing too well using english and then ended up just explaining stuff to Chinese students in the front row with the occasional stilted comment to the rest of the class. What she could convey was pretty basic too so you'd wonder what she did the rest of the time.

It was a late arvo class and I had to rush from work, I was pretty pissed.
I'm pretty when I was at ANU there was a rumour that teaching in any language other than English wasn't allowed in the business and econ courses, because there were a lot of complaints about it.
From the Unimelb website...

>English is the language of instruction when you come to study at Melbourne.

>Your lectures, tutorials, exams, class discussions and other activities will be in English. Given this, it's important you understand what English language requirements you'll need to meet to be offered a place at Melbourne.

Source: https://study.unimelb.edu.au/how-to-apply/english-language-requirements

Seems the university has been ignoring staff and tutors breaching this requirement.
I (domestic student) failed assessments because I couldn’t get them done on time. Whilst I personally witnessed international students of Saudi/UAE/Indian descent purchase or plagiarise and pass the course.

I foolishly held myself to the ethics of learn or fail trying. These people paid to play and weirdly no questions asked. 

In one tutorial where a student had literally completed an assignment over night but couldn’t explain a word of it to me, I reported this and nothing happened, that student passed and I failed a unit.

Reported this to course coordinator and nothing came to it…

Years later I’m in industry thriving but it scares me that idiot might be building a bridge back in their home country or worse yet mine.
I've worked in China for two decades. 

My current team has minimum requirement of an overseas uni degree, for which most of the staff did a Masters in Australia / UK / US. Nevertheless, most of them speak terrible English, not to mention have no idea how to write-up an analysis paper or even do basic research. 

(I studied at a Chinese uni for a year, and all classes were 100% in Mandarin. It was expected that if you were there to learn the language and culture, then you had to only use Chinese and your own language was not to be used at school. Apparently this kind of policy would be considered racist in Australia though.)
Look on the bright side, Revenge for every student that had to pick up the slack in a group assignment. 

Take the Arvo off girls/boys!
lol I saw the Group of 8 CEO (in an article in another paper this morning) say they were just victims caught up in the whole debate about the migration intake.
Time to break out the popcorn and watch the fireworks
Universities as a business. International students and teachers are just an income stream.
I go to unimelb and this happened all the time
I'd be demanding my HECS be wiped for that. NO ONE should have to learn a second language in their home country JUST to do their studies. I'm sorry, but if you want to come to Australia to study, YOU need to learn the basics of the english language.
I don't know why this is suddenly being presented as if it were a new thing. This exact shit was happening when I was an undergrad student in 2006.
Yep. I remember getting lecture notes handed out in Mandarin over a decade ago. This shit isn’t new.
[deleted]
How are CCP officials supposed to easily launder their money in Australia when so much is in English!
A mate of mine walked into a lecture where the lecturer was teaching in Chinese. This was an IT course at Wollongong well over a decade ago
This country doesn’t care about anything but a quick buck. I’m done caring about what happens my country I can’t do it anymore.  most people are completely ok with this that’s why it’s happening, it’s disgusting.
Why don't they set up courses a d universities... In china?

All they need is a building, chairs and lectirers right? Don't they make billions and billions?
This is entirely due to the unis allowing this to happen. 

It’s no fault of the international students who participate. 

Aus unis pretend to be prestigious but they know this happens and pretty much encourages it to happen (but externally they will say it’s not good). 

They want the money. They market themselves to international markets. They dont want to do anything that could potentially affect this cash cow. 

The Aus Gov encourages this to happen too. Because money. 

Dont blame the people buying the product that’s for sale.
Once a Chinese international student here, though I was intentionally avoiding tutorials that aren't "diverse" enough and ask course coordinator to move me to a different group. What the article described happened once for my four years of undergrad study, but I wouldn't say it is a typical experience (depending on the course, uni, lecturer etc).

Chinese students who are less proficient with English would tend to find tutorial together with a mandarin-speaking tutor. Harry in the article probably ended up in one of those tutorial. It really depends on the course and the lecturer's selection for theirs tutors. The article is trying to draw a picture that Australian higher education is dominated by Chinese from a single case, which is not entirely accurate and fair IMO. Most major universities would still try to control international students under a certain percentage.
Welcome to Chidney - China with out the communist party.
International student here

I legit skip half of my lectures because I dont understand the lecturer's english , kudos for trying i guess, and thankfully im passing so far.
Weird country. Feel sorry for Aussie kids.
At least they are teaching stuff, it's not some bs degree where student enrol to drive for ubereat.
It was not this bad on that tutorials are conducted in language other than English but when I was in uni 15 years ago but many students back then sure as fuck can't function in a professional setting. 

Australia has serious issues in enforcing rules that rock the boat. This has been happening for ages and is known issue in the university industry.
Happened to me in my ageing support classes too
WTF is this. Just some random calls into ABC, says his class was entirely in chinese and without verifying anything we are accepting this situation as true?

I bet at worst possible case, it was a lecturer privately talking to either a single or a small group of students in their native tongue because they were proficient.
It's a tutorial and not a lecture.  So you're looking at anywhere between 10 and 20 students and a tutor that is often someone like a 4th year student or a related Masters student.

This likely went against the instructions and standards the university sets.

If this was a lecture then I would have a major issue with it.  But a tute a lot less so.  Either reprimand the tutor and require them to operate in English, or setup some of the tutes as bilingual or a specific foreign language.  

I see absolutely no reason you couldn't offer tutes in Mandarin if there was demand for it.  Fundamentally the assessments will have to be in english, and the students would be better off working in English the whole time, but if you do have comprehension barriers I don't see why you can't cater for it.

Australia exports education, and there are a huge number of foreign students who are here for the degree and then leave.  I don't see a reason we shouldn't cater to them, if it doesn't come at the cost of other students. In this case it did, and that is the problem, not that it was in mandarin.
Australian universities aren’t seen as prestigious as European and US universities by Chinese standards and are instead a joke. Most of the wealthy elite Chinese students here couldn’t get into the UK or US and Australia is a cheaper alternative. Students banned by the US for having PLA or CCP connections are able to go to Australia. Foreign PhD researchers are researching on matters of Chinese interests rather than areas of improving Australia’s future. China’s elites own our universities. You have rich foreigners doing research on our education or public health system while not having any lived experience in it. And then you have PhD thesis about anime fandoms.
A few years back, I did a postgrad course. 

That feeling when you are a second gen chinese perp who can't speak any chinese and there are only like 5 other domestic students in the cohort of like 300. And when I tried to make a wechat account (course coordinator would answer some questions on that) I got instantly banned because the root detection on that app is crazy. 🫠

itsover
I read the article, and while I'm not saying it isn't true, it's literally the unsubstantiated claim of a single student. That's a sample size of one.

That's some pretty bold journalism right there
Sydney Myers staff were told to serve Chinese people prior to Australians as they spend more money.
Sounds like some culture war bullshit. More heat than light clearly.
What is the bet that student would ask a question in Mandarin and the tutor responded to those students in that language but that was it, but some young Karen in training translated this to the entire tutor being in that language?
I naturally translate when I am speaking a language that I know at least one person in the group can’t speak. Alternately, we all pivot to a language everyone in that group can speak.

This is just astonishingly rude at best.

Ironically, it does provide instructive illustration to English speakers what it’s like having English speakers move to foreign countries and adamantly refuse to learn native languages, because the Chinese are the only other people who regularly do that 🤣

There are, however, many people of Chinese descent who are multilingual (usually the more contact they’ve had with English speakers, ironically), so you shouldn’t paint with too broad a brush.
I studied in a korean university, and there were classes taught in English. there were also korean versions of those same classes. why can't australian universities offer this service? wouldn't it make everyone happier? separate them, and clearly advertise that some/all instruction will be in chinese. also make it clear that if a Chinese student takes these classes it doesn't not reflect on any supposed English abilities they have.
One English-speaking student in an online class of Mandarin speaking students and lecturer… majority rules, right?
I recently applied to Monash for a masters and my offer was conditional on me passing a ~$400 English test. This is despite the fact that I’m a native English speaker, I’m an Australian citizen, I’m originally from Canada (I guess you could argue that there’s a small chance I’d be French-Canadian) AND I already had done a quick 15-minute zoom interview where it would have been pretty obvious that English is my first language.
And then if you complained about it you would be instantly targeted as a "racist"
For the students, or the lecturers?
This was true in UNSW around 2017. For an 4th year electrical engineering lab, the demonstrators were explaining the lab task in Chinese. Only did they do the explanation in English when I asked for it.
When I studied at unimelb around 2014 I had multiple accounting and economics tutorials where the tutor only spoke in mandarin. If I asked them to repeat anything in English the tutor looked at me, said read the online notes and then continued talking in mandarin. Several friends and I all complained but heard nothing back.
Im holding out for the fact check and yet..
Has been happening for decades, mate. Can confirm, at Melb Uni circa 2001-2.


lol ever been to uni? it's ridiculous. Some may as well just teach in chinese. I'm sure in their native tongue they can explain things quite well, but their english is so bad that they really should not be teaching. Then when you work through worksheets/tasks, they'll speak to the chinese students in chinese for a long time.
I had a friend that similar things happened to in the early 2000s. Tutor was holding tutorials exclusively in Bahasa for a mostly Indonesian tutorial and the two students who weren't Indonesian got screwed until the Uni actually listened to their complaint and rectified the issue.
If it’s not true, it’s sane.
This happened to me at UTS in 2011, finance subject
How is it surprising? When you let lots of international students in to study, at some point in time the curriculum will be modified to offer courses in a language that most of the student base is comfortable in. Look at the Dutch universities, they now offer courses in both Dutch and English due to (mostly international) student demands.
Happened to me. Adelaide Uni, 2016
It will be covered up and swept up under the carpet and any individuals who complain about it  targeted as "right wing racists" Much like protest rights have been silenced by political correctness on university campuses  by the CCP and their embassies. The arrival of the "Confucius institutions" being embedded into our universities  should have seen this coming.

Is it a surprise that one of the main reasons the Chinese government dropped economic sanctions was the impact that it was having on Chinese students and not because of the harm that it was doing to our industries.
A study score is meaningless as it represents a rank.  As far as I know there is no score that derives absolute academic skill.
My CEO is Chinese and explained it to me. In China the upper elite (highest ranking party members and billionaires) send their children to the ivy league (Harvard, Yale, Oxford, Cambridge). Those that come from well off families and are extremely talented academically go to the best Chinese universities. Those that aren't as smart but still come from well off families get sent to Australia and Canada to study.
Yes - it's often looked on favorably, as a chance to broaden horizons, improve job prospects, prove you can work with international folk, have demonstrated excellent English skills. There are other reasons too.

Yes - extremely packed, extremely competitive. Professors that have done guest lectures for international students verses Chinese students at a Chinese University have told me that the China based students way outclass the ones come to Australia in demonstrating motivation to learn.

Not really - Australia is seen as cheaper than some of the alternatives, but not compared to all of the possible choices, and it's more often taken up by wealthier families, going overseas to begin with, as a way to "buy" a placement, with less "stress".

Yes.
Suprisingly Aus uni qualifications hold standing in world rankings. China and other countries have massive problems with fake degrees.

 So students look to Australia.
an engineering student or doctor out of the Australian system is recognised world wide the same is not true for other countries coming to Australia
1. To avoid Gaokao, chinese national tests (Some applied to Australia's top university with gaokao score).  Most top uni in china required gaokao scores (unless high academic/sport achievement), private doesn't.


2. Early 21 century companies in China hired based on school rankings or Qs, however since covid they no longer flavours international student.


3. Visa, only for the smart/over 25 years old. Most Chinese international student show no interest on staying (no attempt on getting high mark, internship, etc).
All of the above. I live with two Chinese students at the moment.
1 - both did not score enough marks to secure admission in a reputable university back. 
2 - Comes from extremely wealthy families.
3 - as per their opinion, it is way easier to pass in Aus Uni compared with to back home.
In China, the university entrance exam, is extremely competitive. Students  need to achieve perfect scores to gain admission to top local universities. As a result, many upper-class families opt to send their children overseas for higher education if they cannot secure a place in a prestigious local university.
Prestige is very important in Chinese society, the top tier Chinese universities are exceptionally prestigious (and are legitimately fuck off hard to get into). If you aren't getting in to those, it's much more prestigious to study abroad than it is to get a degree from a lower-tier Chinese university. If you can afford it.
Its just more prestigious to have studied overseas than locally, as ironic as it sounds when they come overseas and learn nothing of the country they're visiting and hold tightly to the same values they have back home.


Its the same as consumerism in the west, just under a different lens.
Method of entry to invest out of China is a decent incentive for a lot of families. Doesn't just happen in Australia though
Western degrees are more valuable than ones from Asia, simple as that.  
Even if the person who earned the degree is completely fucking stupid.
It’s a pathway to permanent migration.
They want a work visa, then residency, then citizenship, then family migration. 
Though it is likely Chinese universities have no credibility, we all know the real reason is that people got lied to being told that going to university here means they get to stay here. It's our university building bases in other countries where they do anything possible to send them here to spend their money.
Wow, this has much credibility as the damn article this is all linked to.  
  
Oh you heard from someone that a tutor spoke to some students in chinese... omg... were they actually teaching at the time? Was the conversation even about the class? What law are they breaking speaking another language?...
If every single student in the course can speak Chinese then it should be fine imo.
Quite frankly, a shitstorm that has to happen not to be nasty, but to wake up our politicians and university administrators. These are the people who are damaging our educational institutions reputation whatever reputation is left with greed.
r / australian's 9/11
I honestly doubt it. This has been the status quo for a good number of years
What happened?
Good work, mate. You did the right thing.
Name and shame the uni and course
https://www.betootaadvocate.com/uncategorized/international-students-rejoice-as-native-english-speaker-agrees-to-do-entire-group-assignment-for-cash/
I got the "hey white guy you team upwith these three chinese" treatment ... what fun
There will be no fireworks involved. There will be no reaction to this at all. I doubt you will even hear about this again after today.
Which courses specifically?
How is that “fair enough”??

Fuck that. Who knows what you missed out on? You shouldn’t miss out on anything in the classroom when you’ve paid so much to be there.
Given that Indians themselves are used to converse in English _in India_ as a common language in a country with many languages and dialects, it’s not okay
No, fuck that as well. "English motherfucker, do you speak it?" Yes. 

Remind the uni - you're not getting what you paid for.
As a 3rd year Economics student at the University of Melbourne, I had a very similar experience to Harry for a compulsory management subject. I was one of a few domestic students in the class, with the majority of the class being primarily international Chinese students.

They didn't understand English well enough, so the tutor would firstly explain the concepts in Mandarin and then explain them in English. However, in the cases where a Chinese student asked a question that would be in Mandarin, the tutor never bothered to translate the question nor give an answer in English for the rest of us.

I had to deal with these students in a group assignment where they used Google translate to translate their Mandarin into English rather than writing in English themselves... The quality of the English was deplorable. When I complained to my tutor they asked me "is this worth complaining about?" which left me in a position where I could do nothing but rewrite their part of the assignment myself!
Can’t believe it took so long to find this comment.
You are one of the best underrated comment here!
Sounds like something a Fine Arts student who never stepped foot outside of their school would say.
> Ironically, it does provide instructive illustration to English speakers what it’s like having English speakers move to foreign countries and adamantly refuse to learn native languages


How is this in any way relevant, when the official language of Australia is English?


It's not unreasonable to expect as an Australian attending an Australian university to be able to attend a tutorial conducted in English. Otherwise you might as well throw the ATAR requirement out the window and instate a Chinese language proficiency requirement for local Australian students instead. 
Because the policy of Unimelb is that all instruction is in English and most importantly you have to pass a level of English proficiency to be offered a place in the course
That's because the important part of "~$400 English test" isn't English test, it is the $400 part.
Can someone translate this to English? I don't speak poutine...
Lol I had to do that to get permanent residency in your homeland.
It's a common complaint amongst academic staff, including those who were international students themselves once. 

It not only hurts the university, but it hurts the student who doesn't meet competency. They fail courses over and over again by not meeting competency levels. And its often the tutors (who are underpaid PhDs) that get the brunt of those students complaints. It's unethical of universities to be taking their money with little concern for how they cope once in the classroom. 
So no, it's not racist to point out a massive flaw in the system that disadvantages everyone except the university that benefits from the cash. 

I've had to remove countless participants from studies due to being unable to answer basic questions about tasks I'm making them do... which calls into question if they can even ethically consent to the studies they volunteer for.
Former Australian immigrant who worked as a lawyer with Australian immigration and citizenship policies for years

Yes, I’m a citizen if it matters

Theres a HUGE misconception regarding what immigrants are angry about re the English Testing. Some of the biggest hits include:

——

You generally have to take the $380 - $600+ test every 2 years because it expires regardless of previous result or actual proficiency (Sometimes more due to purely conservative vote gathering policy changes). …Because that’s how language works…

I’m a native speaker (My mother even taught Eng Lit) and I had to take the English Test 8+ times

——

Partly because the test itself is INCREDIBLY questionable, including in how it is administered.

Unless slash and burn farming, 16th century refrigeration, traditional housing, the hills hoist and (My favourite) gender roles in same sex couples and its effect on the traditional Australian family (Someone usually tries to justify this re weeding out extremism, that’s sad af mates) are common topics of Australian conversation

In my 8+ times doing the test, I was always slightly under the score required in one of the 4 bands for the extra immigration qualifications. This critical band changed every time but it was always the same score pattern (Perfect across all except in one which was just under)

And on scores - what people FAMOUSLY don’t know is that on the test you get scored more for using long run on sentences with complicated language - which is very contrary to common or good practice

——

On common practices, the standard demanded is provably MUCH higher than the common Australian standard

People did complain about this and were told to toughen up. Until certain countries complained and then an exception was attempted to be made for 5  specific countries on the grand scientific basis of “They’re basically like us” …GUESS which countries

They tried to make the standards higher in 2017 to 8/9 as the “accurate Australian standard”(If you believe THAT…).Imagine being an immigrant and watching Senator Hanson famously stutter and stumble through a speech re on how critical it is that immigrants need to to have this level of English to integrate or be a good citizen (She sure af didn’t and wasn’t)

——

And there’s MUCH more (IDP who administers the test has/is taking advantage of Australia’s manufactured fear of the evil other to MASSIVELY rip off taxpayers)

Let’s not even go into the policies re how integration is important but those support systems like English classes have been slashed while the demand to speak “Good english” and immigrant taxation has gotten higher

People aren’t largely complaining that they have to speak English, they’re complaining because they are being absolutely RORTED in the name of “assimilation“. While Australians are cheering it happening and calling anyone who disagrees a whinger. Of course there’s resentment for that

The ones who get called racists are the ones who read all that and disregard it with an anaemic “Yeah but nah“ or “Don’t like it, then LEAVE“ when they know they would hate those conditions and situations applied to them

By definition you ARE a racist if your determination on why people need to take the test or have a standard relies on an unreliable (Often unacknowledged)subjective speculation of their origin rather than the issues with the problematic system itself or the atrocious narrative that vilifies folks who don’t deserve it so the real dickheads earn votes, clout or cash

(Also the ones who were already reaching for the downvote button when they read I was an immigrant. How’s this? I’ve actually had my worth tested and vetted to be a citizen so really I’m provably MORE Australian than you are O.O)

Its a class issue not a visa one

Happy to answer questions. Not willing to be insulted or condescended to, I’ll reply with a demonstration of Australian English that’s quite a bit better than a large portion of the population’s preferred subservient version of me (Someone is about to get insulted and pretend that’s not a thing)

EDIT - formatting and spelling (Doing this on mobile but ironyyyyy!)
Por que no los dos


Or whatever the Chinese for that is...
abc wouldn't lie... would they?
I've heard from a friend of it happening in finance classes at ANU as well (roughly 10 years ago)
I had a fucking Masters of Communications tutorial taught in Mandarin a few years ago at Melbourne Uni
Yep. Can confirm, my niece Melbourne Uni, business deg, circa 2018-2020.
Melb uni grad 04, never seen it. Maybe not in soft eng
The difference is those classes are formally offered in a foreign language
It's not directly comparable - Dutch people almost universally speak English as a second language and most journal papers and other resources are in English so it makes sense for alot of their courses to just be conducted in English.
If, hypothetically, they were advertised as being taught in Mandarin Chinese, then I'd be fine with it, but they're not, and the presumed language of communication is English.
They're accommodating the global language that is spoken all over the world and will be used for whatever job you get. Mandarin is spoken by only one country. Accommodating the global lingua franca means you can have a class with North Americans, Europeans, Australians etc. What does a Mandarin class do?
They're not asking for that. They suggested international students should be able to perform at a level that would be comparable at minimum to a domestic student who scores 25 in English/Lit.
Oh, so we're the USC of China...
Much the same for India. 

Then Indians have to face passing their JEE Advanced University entrance exam which by all accounts is the toughest in the world.

 Australia is a easy and accessible option along with the VISA option which can be very a attractive option. There is also the nasty aspect of their society where even if these students are excellent students they still have to face caste barriers in places like the USA, Canada and even Australia. 

The US is even considering passing laws that makes the  practice of the caste system illegal its so widespread. Its generally practiced by Ivy league Indian managers largely in tech and IT companies who want to stratify Indian cultural values in other countries rather than using merit.
The below average students that couldn't be competitive in their country come here. I've met quite a few who are upfront about it, but our education is awful, no ones coming here for it.
It's not that they aren't smart, many of them are, maybe they just aren't the best gaokao takers.
It is also a pathway to a longer visa in Australia. A longer visa opens up a lot of employment and investment options
> it's looked as a chance to prove you can work with international folk, have demonstrated excellent English skills.

*Chinese trollface*
>China based students way outclass the ones come to Australia in demonstrating motivation to learn.

Rich kids are the same everywhere.
That makes sense, although from what I'm hearing plenty of students that don't have English skills are being accepted anyway and if the lecture is being taught in mandarin then I'm not sure if this really demonstrates "working with international folk" and "excellent English skills". I suppose it's more about the optics of having these skills rather than actually having them, "fake it till you make it" seems to be the mantra everywhere :P.

> Professors that have done guest lectures for international students verses Chinese students at a Chinese University have told me that the China based students way outclass the ones come to Australia in demonstrating motivation to learn.

Your wording is a bit confusing for me so just to triple check that I've read this correctly: Australian Professors who have gone to China to give a guest lecture have noticed a difference between domestic Chinese students compared to the Chinese students they teach locally? I suppose that would make sense.
Funny thing about that is I have a mate who did his medical degree in China because it was so much cheaper than Australia (I also now yanks who studied in Cuba for the same reason). Of course, its been a pain in the arse and a few years of extra study to do his equivalence exams when he got back ro Australia though.
That was teaching for most of the time except for presentations; personally as a Chinese I feel comfortable with that, but if we are talking in the context of an australian uni, it does not look good.

I got few sources but opt not to have them included as those are posts from social media users, i.e. from xiaohongshu. I do not want to pose anyone under privacy breach.
If I enrol at an English speaking school in an English speaking country I expect all communication to be in English. If I enrol at a non-English speaking school I expect to not know what the fuck is going on as they will use their native language
As a Chinese, I do agree with this; but as an international student, I fear not - like we pay 50k aud a year for masters taught in chinese? why don't just study in china (like the costs are way cheaper)
We complained before the final exam with a laundry list of complaints (we had no idea what was going to be on the final exam, course notes provided in Chinese etc.). They gave us all 10 extra marks after results were posted (literally checked in the morning and the afternoon and they'd added 10 extra marks). The marking throughout the whole course was wildly inconsistent and tbh completely bs. I know some friends of mine who had handed in pretty similar assignments and one got 4/10 and one got 10/10. Absolute shitshow.
The Uni has (or had, at least) a specific rule banning non-English classes, so it was just CS flying under the radar.
I had it occur in a math subject I took last semester
Glass ceilings of language put into our Universities that is not a requirement while our main language of communications is suppressed.

 It would like watching Indian TV where they speak Hindi and then switch back and fourth between English and Hindi and you cant follow  what's going on properly. It really unbalances your mental processes. 

I can imagine how it would feel if you were in  class where only 50% of what is being discussed is understood. How can this kind of crap be allowed to happen? Was it a course requirement that you as a local student had to be proficient in Hindi or Chinese?
Me: this is a culture war 


You: you only say that because you're part of a group that has bad culture! 
I agree with you completely.

Now, why is it when Englishmen move to Spain, they complain no one speaks English, and the Spanish are told to get over it?
The official language of Australia is not english, australia does not have an official language.
It’s a $400 (extra) application fee.
Pardner, my amigo here was Shanghai’d into forking over four Benjimans to some fancy-schmancy institute of lernin’ to do a bogus “English test” when my compadre is frickin’ Canuck born-‘n’ raised
I had an engineering communications unit that revolved largely around a group project. Most of the semester working on it with multiple stages where like we'd do research, give it to another group member, do a basic report using that research and switch again, do the full report using the bit you were given, do a presentation.

6 people in the group. I was the only non-international student. One guy straight up couldn't speak English. As in, during meetings he had to have one of the other guys translate for him. Fairly certain he didn't write any of his sections himself. One guy straight up never came to meetings or tutorials then rocked up for the presentation, the coordinator ripped him a new one and kicked him out. One guy literally plagiarised my own work and gave it to me. I was proofreading it and couldn't help but think "this sounds really familiar, have I read it before?". He genuinely didn't understand why it was an issue.

A couple were actually really dedicated students. Broken English so I had to do a fair bit of touching up on their sections, but they genuinely put in the effort. I'll leave guessing what nationality they all were as an exercise for the reader.
Yes this! I studied at RMIT a few years back, predominantly Chinese international students and a few others (Vietnam, Cambodia).

Any time we had a group task I’d be lumped in with some of the Chinese kids, some were pretty studious and worked hard, but decent chunk could barely comprehend our reading tasks and it caused a lot of friction with some of our lecturers who seemed to resent that the majority of the class went in one ear and out the other.

One of my classmates (Chinese kid, father owned a construction company) explained that most of our classmates were forced to be there to get some basic credentials so that they could inherit and run their parents respective businesses.

Obviously this is just my experience, but the failure was mutual on behalf of uninterested students and frustrated lecturers. 

In one of our classes we’d had three different lecturers before mid year, completely fucked us.
What gets me is doesn't this mean that all these graduates are going out and getting into jobs in industries where they don't have the necessary skills for the work because they didn't have the language ability to learn them while studying??? 

Why aren't we hearing about multiple occurrences of people fucking up in jobs because it turns out they weren't qualified because they can barely speak English? The media would be all over it surely. Or when it happens do the industries just hush it up?

Then again that's assuming that the graduates are staying in Australia and getting jobs here, which I know isn't necessarily the case, in which case if they're fucking up in overseas industries we probably wouldn't find out here. :/
Tutors are paid, where are you getting that from?
My non-white relative who has quite poor English managed to avoid doing an English test for Australian immigration because he has a full British passport :)
That rant was simultaneously very satisfying and very frustrating to read (and 100% spot on).
Absolutely agree and it's refreshing to see someone really shining a light on the ugly corrupted parts of the "tHeY jUsT nEeD tO sPeAK eNgLisH" arguments. 


Immigration has become an income stream for our government as well as so so many private businesses and institutions. The end result is exploitation of all involved; those immigrating, existing residents, and those who genuinely are trying to do the right thing for both our new and existing residents. 


Immigrants have become an exploitable renewable resource and it's disgusting. 


Unfortunately any time I've tried to raise similar points of "no no, the *people* immigrating aren't the issue, it's the *exploitative system*" I get one of three reactions; 


1. You're white and from the country, I'm going to assume you're racist


2. You're white and not immediately vilifying immigrants, I'm going to assume you're full of white guilt and will defend immigrants no matter what


3. You're a white Australian from white Australian parents, wtf would you know about it?! 


So I've had to largely restrict myself to trying to amplify and support voices like yours; people who have "the right" 🙄 to talk on the subject, who aren't afraid to acknowledge and explore the nuances and complexities of the subject, and who won't shy away from ugly truths. 


Please keep speaking up so that people like me have someone they can point to and say "Listen. Be uncomfortable. Hear from the voice you demanded the truths you rejected". 
16th century refrigeration is a cornerstone of Australian society. I cannot go a day without talking to a plethora of individuals about it.......

It kinda sounds like a light form of torture, and I kinda want the politicians to do the test ever two years.
Immigrants being rorted by the government? I am Jack’s complete lack of surprise. I’m convinced a lot of the hoop jumping is just so jobsworths can say “no” without actually thinking about the human on the other end.
Valid points, although somewhat circmstantial. There are a plethora of examples were students have extremely poor English skills despite the complexities of the test that you explain. In this example these students have certainly not fulfilled the academic requirements that you have listed, so where's the discrepancy?

Further, native students don't just get into uni because they are native, there are minimum English requirements for almost all courses as well, and from my experience, mimicking the requirements and parameters you have talked about. Aside from obvious elements such as the cost of the test, which isn't really comparable anyway.

And while I agree it's a rort, it's not necessarily an immigration specific issue but rather an academic issue at large. Take the GAMSAT for example, highly competitive and last I checked it cost $500 to undertake the test, whether or not you're native, it's probably even more now. Many students have to undertake the GAMSAT numerous times, which is also somewhat unrelated as well, as its a general test of various topics rather than medicine specific.

Further, I could list numerous other examples, the entire academic structure from post graduate to post doc is rife with rorts and completely taking advantage of students and workers in academia.

I imagine somewhat, the complexities of things like the English standard testing, is to somewhat serve as a barrier to limit immigration and study visas as well.
Couple of points here:


Higher scores in standard English tests are one of the highest predictive factors in how well immigrants integrate in the job market.    It's not a perfect test, that's why it makes sense to have exemptions for native English speaking countries, but it's the best we have right now. 


We are stuck with the bogans but we have the a surplus of immigrant candidates we can be picky.
为什么不兼得？
Even if ABC was totally honest people could lie to them.
I was doing some classes at unimelb business school around that time, they were all in English.
I didn't get the classes in another language at Melbourne Uni.

However I once had a tutor that could barely speak at all. They just drew on the whiteboard, with minimal spoken communications.
> Maybe not in soft eng

That's one field where a working knowledge of english is pretty much essential given the vast majority of software language are english based.
I did both STEM and business classes at unimelb, they were all in English.
its different because our country is more backwards than the dutch are?
The language in the Netherlands is Dutch. English is a foreign language. They should keep all classes in Dutch and not accommodate to people that want to live in a country but are too lazy to learn the local language.

In addition, most Europeans don’t prefer to speak or use English. I use German at home and  I refuse to use English for anything that I can do in German. When I am in Europe I prefer to speak German or French before I speak English.
Mandarin is spoken by several countries, more if you expand the definition to chinese speakers.

It is the world’s most spoken language, english is a distant 3rd after spanish.

Mandarin is also spoken widely around the world, although majority of speakers are of chinese descent.
The problem is they quite often do on paper. Unless they start interviewing students they’ll need to accept the test results can be off.
And thats fine, the problem is the 'comparable at minimum to someone who attains a study score of 25 in english/literature', which represents iirc somewhere around the 40%tile of all students. If the current cohort of students are all brainrot skibidi toilet memester english level (just work with it) then not even the 40tile of the skibidi cohort would not actually be coherent enough to speak actual english.   

You will need a different method in measuring these skills and the study score method is not how to do it.
Yes.
[deleted]
That doesn't necessarily mean much. Lots of universities around the world give courses in more than one language.
It's harder to get into a prestigious university in China, not that it matters that much for most undergraduate STEM courses. A lot of decent Australian mathematicians just do their pretty much pro forma undergraduate degree at the university down the road from mum and dad's house before they head off to Princeton or wherever for their PhD.
You just doubled down on the objectively shit takes, didn't ya?
"Yee", and i can not stress this enough, "Haw" brother.
Oh yeah, fair dinkum
I would agree this is across all universities, but also culturally there is less of an individualistic culture and more of a “we are getting through this together” mentality in a lot of south East Asian countries but especially in mainland China. 

If you ask for products to achieve a specific grade or standard, I’ve had suppliers ask for more money for that grade. The end product doesn’t change, but the sticker changes. You’re paying for the sticker. Discomfiting confusion when you raise you wanted the actual product to change.

Similarly, I’ve seen large WeChat channels and groups for tens or hundreds of students all suppling their work across multiple universities and helping draft work to be submitted because the core concept of “I am achieving this to prove I am competent” isn’t reality for some people. They just need the piece of paper to go home and be given a role by their parents or friends or party affiliation and can’t get it until they have the paper. They will learn how to do the job on the job, their requirement to get the job is the piece of paper. The worth of learning English is mute if your job is to provide reseller services to Chinese vendors in the Australian market, with all B2B contacts being bilingual.

Once I understood that huge divide in the reasoning behind wanting to come to an Australian university, it then caused intense discomfort in my ability to support students, because functionally failing someone that doesn’t understand why plagiarism is bad when it’s a requirement of the job they are wanting to get in China is hard. It’s a western ideal to be promoted on your own benefits. It may not apply to other countries or even our own.

How many legal firms, engineering firms, golf club affiliations or medium enterprise managerial positions come from merit rather than who you know. Punishing a 19 year old for not conforming to an ideal reality that doesn’t exist is harder than it is over a screen or chat.
Yeah it sucks across the board! 
I know individuals who got up early every morning to study English to become highly competent to the point where I wouldn't have known they were an international student. But there are some who just have poor communication skills, and they get left behind. Which is awful for students who have to deal with that in group work, but it must also be an awfully isolating experience for the student who can't communicate. Everyone involved suffers in some way, and it breeds resentment that I think is often misplaced. 

I've had students fail because they seemed wholly unaware of their course requirements. I can't see how it's reasonable that the university took their money, knowing fully well that with their grades, they'd likely not pass again. It's potentially putting them into extreme debt for what? 
Sure, they might get put on academic probation, but that seems to be it? We don't seem to provide any support to help them overcome these difficulties once accepted. If they did, maybe they'd pick up these issues earlier and be able to intervene. 

Dealing with academic misconduct is another ball park inof itself...
this is what most of the racist dont understand, most of the students are not here for a visa, they're here for a 'paper certificate' then fk off back home
I've heard this is actually becoming an issue in China where employers are noticing that graduates from certain foreign universities aren't necessarily competent and they now prefer to hire graduates from Chinese universities
The people getting these degrees aren't average Joes, they are connected, they are the kids of people with pull, that's how they got the visa in the first place, so of course it will get hushed up, it has been for decades. 

I worked in Software Development for many years and the few times we worked with Chinese firms on things there were people with prestigious degrees that couldn't code Hello World, but there were enough actually competent people to carry them.
I am one... pay for the hours spent does not often allign especially when it comes to marking. 
Hence all the underpayment cases that make the headlines.
Thank you for saying this. It was very kind of you and very unexpected. I appreciate it very much

Even if you are white, I think you should keep talking on the matter especially if you’re actual knowledgeable or compassionate about the people involved. God knows on every side we lack such people

It’s sad to say but I could say the same thing about you. It doesn’t matter what I say if I’m not “Born Australian“ or whatever technical contortion is preferable today for a certain type of person. I think having people who are conceivably “One of them” according to them, who does have this knowledge is a helpful way to at least to start to convince a certain demographic

Though of course I don’t mean to put it on you! XD

It doesn’t matter what you are so long as what you do is right, what you base it on is sound. It why the others need uncle Rupert’s catchy sound-bites that last-

(The cheaper housing if low number of immigrants is a childish joke of an argument btw. If there’s fewer people we’ll be taxed more to preserve the value as has happened before. They’ll probably blame the youth if they cant do immigrants)

-to sustain themselves and why they almost always fail in the end (Retreating to the internet in places like this), eventually seeing themselves and the results of what they’re doing

Much like the US election, I think there’s quite a few who are captive to the sunk-cost fallacy in whom to blame, and what it might mean, the work they might have to do were they to stop. Even if they really wanted to

Gods, it kills me that Australia has multiple Nazi groups now who take such easy advantage of places and issues like this (Among more public others… )

But that’s why we have to keep showing up with the things that keep them in their safe-spaces where they can pretend they have a point but knowing that if they actually tried to present their weak positioning, it’d be pretty easy to stomp out

If one of those such people are reading this - don’t get mad at the immigrants for this. That’s something you’ve been trained to do but you can stop now which just an inch of the consideration for their situation that you’d ask for yourself were you in the same place.

Get mad at the trainer

Its a class issue not a visa one
White people from the country are the least racist. It the inland queenslanders that are the worst
Ah so YOU'RE to blame! :P

Weirdly during the time when they were making the citizenship test harder for immigrants, the politicians had the dual citizenship constitutional crisis

Short version - via the Constitution (You know slightly important body of law), you can’t serve in parliament and certain offices if you hold two citizenships. s.44 - Allegiance to a foreign power

Seems quite a few politicians weren’t aware of this (Try using THAT excuse as an immigrant)

Months earlier Immigrants had to buck up and prove they were of good/vague “Australian character” under laws that were announced overnight (Outside of due parliamentary process) but those jerks laying down the law demanded to keep their roles, wouldn’t provide information without consulting a lawyer, refused to provide information full stop (Tony Abbot, a Prime Minister no less), demanded consideration because their lawyers got it wrong or because it wasn’t fair and THREE of them blamed their parents (Barnaby Joyce was one and continued to vote despite the issue) for doing it and not telling them

These were the people who, pressured by regular folks, would bang on about “good character/values” and “respecting the lawwww” or ”Hard decisions” and “tough calls” having to be made for the good of straya and national security when it comes to immigrants regardless of their situations

Then you have absolute f\*cks like the incredibly anti-immigrant (“Because they can’t obey the laws of common decency ”) One Nation’s Malcom Roberts crying at the podium about how his dad didn’t tell him he was a NZ citizen, how Australian values are about understanding, how much service he had given to the country and how who he was in terms of AUSTRALIA mattered more…

Immigrants watched that happen. They knew they wouldn’t be treated that way under the law were situations reversed. They saw all kinds of consideration being demanded for and being given for much less with much less rancor and KNEW that there were officially two Australias

Interestingly it’s suggested that this is why there was later a small swing from new immigrant citizens to the Greens as the two of their party in question actually took responsibility like grown a\*\* adults and Ministers of the law
A lot of impressive language using vague non-commitments in here to still have your cake and eat it too but sure why not? Let’s give it a crack

”Somewhat circumstantial” - circumstance matters. But being dismissive on the basis of hand-waving that a circumstance exists somewhere isn’t a valid position

”Plethora of examples” - “Plethora“ is a fun clever sounding word. Of course they exist. But not independent of examples of anything else to exclusively make a clear constructive point (See “Somewhat circumstantial” How is that suddenly not applicable here?). It’s also weird to suggest that there’s so many and so you have a point, without an actual specific example… (And I‘m the one who had to take the test 8+ times…)

For example: The English the test determines has nothing to do with the ability or purpose assessed. This suggests you’ve never taken the test or actually know what’s in it… or even really considered what I said before dismissing it

”In this example” - which was not the example or statement I was addressing

“Where’s the discrepancy?“ - See “In this example”. It’s cheap to decide I’m answering a different question just to position it as not making sense…

Re native students - ok? I never made the claim that was the case. I don’t know what your “experience” is  that makes you so confident but “mimicking“ isn’t the same as comparable nor does it mean its a comparable situation

“Requirements and parameters” - I specifically didn’t. Please show me where. Again, an example suggesting you don’t know what those requirements are or the circumstances involved. For example:

”Isn’t really comparable anyway” - See “Somewhat circumstantial“. The immigrant experience isn’t remotely comparable to a native Australian, particularly in terms of cost and I don’t just mean money

Academic issue - entirely seperate issue to immigration policy (Though people do love to conflate the two) and not my expertise. For example:

GAMSAT - is a poor comparison. Unlike the required English test it isn’t mandatory nor punitive or even as slightly as exploitative. “somewhat unrelated” is optimistic but recognising that and using it anyway to make a false comparison as validity is very exemplary of the disingenuous discussion around migrants

”Could list numerous other examples” - I’m sure. Several of them probably not anecdotal. but it has no relevance to the discussion re immigration policy which I have actual experience and expertise in (Though that didn’t seem to matter here). See “Somewhat circumstantial“, “Re native students” and “Academic issue”

“I imagine” - Yes. Yes you do. This is a major problem with how Australians give themselves permission treat immigrants. Where does that imagination come from?

The amount of Senators and Committees I spoke to who didn’t know (And some felt they didn’t have to) about the policies they were deciding on beyond some cartoonish stereotype or self-affirming/centred narrative

At this point someone who talks about values in another breath will call me naive for railing at “how the world works” (So long as it’s not happening to them)

‘“Somewhat serve as a barrier” - What happened to that “plethora of examples”? More to the point - that’s not the job of the English Test and CERTAINLY not as a private corporate entity WHILE receiving taxpayer subsidies (IDP isn’t Australian either)

But sure, damn whinging immigrants…

EDIT - downvote away cowards. If you had actual points instead of the fragile soundbites that uncle Rupert spoonfeeds you on the regular so you don’t feel as impotent as you are and throw money at him and his, you might be able to justify things irl.

But you don’t, so you can’t and that’s why you’re here thinking you’re one of many persecuted patriots with a real practical full understanding of the issue instead of a bunch of cheap entitled bullies wrapping your views in the flag and obnoxiously “intellectual“ language thinking that gives it validity instead of just cheaply disgracing the actual values and opportunities of the country and serving the 1% (Who might let you in their club if you’re good…sure)

Don’t get mad at me because the comforting and (only) impressive-sounding BS you subscribe to in lieu of actual information bites you in butt like old mate above . Though boy will Uncle Rups pat you on the head and tell you it’s ok to
I’ve taken the test 8+ times - it draws from a bank of questions to randomise those papers. Its not a large bank either as I’ve run across the same question several times within a decade

Senator Hanson famously tried to make same point about it being a predictive factor but couldn’t actually point to anything but common sentiment. A high English ability is no real determination of degree of integration (Though it would make sense)

On exemptions for English speaking countries. Yes, I agree I get it. The issue is how, why and for whom those exemptions are made. The argument in 2017 for those 5 specific countries I mentioned re English ability could have been applied to a NUMBER of different countries but weren’t.

It was a pleasure to watch the Harvard-accented policy rep from Singapore rip that apart while the Senators who came up with that sad policy (Our taxes!) blushed and stammered

To give you an idea - I’m a poc native English speaker from a third world country who had a notable 10 year history in Australia and had passed the test several times. I had an in demand skill in a niche field with prominent local references and support.

I was given LESS consideration than a group of qualification-lacking heavily Chav-accented Brits for whom I had to do immigration paperwork for who had been in the country for 8 months and were whining about how they had to wait a further 6 for their residency (I had to wait 6-8 years for mine)

It’s not the best system, fine. It’s the best we have, sure. However it doesn’t excuse it from being the best it could be. Or, and here’s the kicker, crapping on its own terms to suit itself- particularly IF the goal is integration and IF it is tied to “Australian values” as it was on 2017

Australia can be picky absolutely- it doesn’t give it a free pass to unfoundedly be a twerp to others on such small pathetic basis contrary to those values it demands of certain others

It’s a bit rich to say it talks about integration when the systems and policies involved specifically exclude or hamstring certain demographics (And malign them for not being able to or resenting a situation that most Australians would themselves)

Let alone the questions in the actual test don’t exactly prove anything about integration (Check out a few of the topics I mentioned). If you’ve got something backing that up, I’m happy to take that back but IELTS famously doesn’t release any independently-verified information. Though wow, will they do a few opining on integration linking to their special (expensive) programs

At this point some will say it’s ok because it’s happening to migrants not “real Australians”, without realising that’s what the government would do to you if it could and will eventually unless fair terms and processes for everyone is preserved
Dutch people choose these courses because they are taught in English

Vast majority of courses that are taught in English are postgraduate

You know in many eastern European countries you can do an entire medical course and become a doctor in English
It's easy to imagine a Europe that speak the international language they learn in school.

It's terrifying to imagine a Europe that speaks only  German
> most Europeans

Must be nice being able to get a definitive answer from ~150m people. You should run the next Eurobarometer.

> When I am in Europe I prefer to speak German or French before I speak English

Oh god you're one of *those*.
Just wrong.  Mandarin is the official language of a couple of countries, 1 city state and one country that China insists is not a country.  

English is the most widely spoken language in the world.  The [list](https://wikiless.northboot.xyz/wiki/List_of_languages_by_total_number_of_speakers) (speakers and number of countries with official language ) goes:

1. English  1.456 billion   35 countries	
2. Mandarin  1.138 billion  5 countries
3. Hindi   610 million 1 country
4. Spanish  559 million 22 countries
5. French  310 million  39 countries
OK cool I guess McDonald's make the best hamburgers in the world because they sell the most right
As someone that studied a foreign language at Uni, it really annoys me how proficiency tests don't take into account speech and listening performance.

In order to be proficient at a language, you absolutely need to be able to listen and speak it.
You're conflating two issues. If the level of English drops in society so poorly that a foreign student with a few weeks on Duolingo is able to rank in the top 40% of year 12 students English scores, that's a different issue entirely. As it is while slang is changing in new generations I don't think we are realistically ever going to in that situation
Tell me you have no idea what the actual level of English proficiency is in young people without telling me.
Racism? More like classism

Spoilt rich kids pay-to-win their way to Australia and dont care about the course

Actual hard workers compete their way into local Chinese universities
And if that is my persuasion I would have picked it. A non-Chinese-language subject outside of China & it's neighbours having discussions in Chinese language isn't on. Why the hell do they even need IELTS or equivalent to enrol if they are just going to get their hand held?
I guess calling me a fine arts student wasn't as convincing as you thought it was 🤡🤡🤡 
I mean, I'm all for collaborative learning. Never would have gotten through kinematics without it. And I've seen the "piece of paper" thing happen with more materials I care to mention. You do pay a bit for the certification that it's a certain grade of steel or whatever when you can pick up the same bolts from Bunnings for a third the price, just without the etching saying it's an M8.8 fastener.

The thing is, when the degree will literally give you authority to put people's lives at risk (engineering, medicine, you get the gist) there's an ethical obligation to actually *learn* rather than just write the answer down. Ok, engineering communications isn't exactly what I'd call a critical unit, but if you don't understand why welds can weaken the surrounding material you might make some serious mistakes.
Interesting viewpoint I hadn't heard before; cheers.
What you described has nothing to do with individualistic vs collectivist cultures. 

It’s opportunistic and it’s a trait that all cultures have. 

A student wants a degree on paper to improve job prospects. 

Australian universities are willing to sell it to them. They pretend they are prestigious universities but also purposely allow this to happen because money. 

Australian government is willing to let the unis do this because money. 

Aus gov and unis are known to sell this product for money. 

Blame the Aus gov. Not the people who are here the buy the product for sale.
Oh I taught at Monash like 5 years ago, so things might have changed since then. I was told by the lecturer that if I don't have enough time to prep for tuts (say like 1hr per tut) I stop there and bring it up with him and he would get us payed for the extra time or hire ppl to help.  Just having someone like that makes all the diff.
I don't know about senator Hanson but the left leaning Grattan institute recently did a study recommending higher weighting of English yest scores in visas.  Their work showed English ability to be even more important than level of education.


I'm curious as to what other countries you would have added to the list.  Certainly plenty of other countries have people who have excellent English skills but they also have significant populations of people who don't.  Singaporean English for example is famously significantly different to American or British English.


https://grattan.edu.au/report/it-all-adds-up-reforming-points-tested-visas/
My point is your argument has a bit of a fallacy.  The world’s most spoken language is Mandarin.

The world’s most popularly eaten hamburger is likely the big mac.  Doesn’t make it the best though.


I’m not arguing for everyone to be using Mandarin, I’m just trying to make you think a little about your unconscious bias.


In Australia, the official language is English, so the course should be taught in English, unless it’s specifically targeted to Chinese students and taught in Mandarin as a foreign language course.


The “outrage” is valid.  
Courses require a specific level of English language comprehension, probably IELTS, TOEFL or similar.
I thought that IELTS does have both speech and listening components? Maybe the required standard is just too low or it is too easy to coach people for the test?
[deleted]
I haven’t blamed students, nor do I blame the government for supporting an industry. 

I blame the for-profit industry for exploiting loopholes in regulation for maximising profits irrespective of outcomes to benefit Australians to the point that they are too big to fail without impacting the Australian economy.

The exact same argument can be copy pasted to Telstra/Optus/Vodafone, or Qantas/Virgin, or Coles/Woolworths, or NIB/Medibank or the housing crisis or .. or.. or.. 

How do you stop private enterprises from chasing quarterly profits at the expense of Australians? Fix that, blaming the government by removing an income stream doesn’t fix the core issue. Nor does blaming international students for wanting to come to an Asia-pacific western university.

Fuck, I want to go back to uni, but I can’t afford $5000-10000 a year debt to change careers and start again on $60-80k a year when the average household needs to earn $150k to afford a house in this current climate.

So what’s the solution? I took a redundancy package in 2017 from a university when the government refused to keep paying the profit margin. What’s the solution to make sure the profit margin doesn’t render thousands of people unemployed that vote and have memories 6 months before an election? They’re usually educated voters, so they’ll know how to bitch and complain.

I don’t know man, I wish I could tell you what the solution is. I don’t have one and anyone selling you a solution that’s “simple” is a fucking liar.
Thank you for this, it’s an impressive report re earning potential and factors

I do think good integration has a much broader scope than that but I respect that is a seperate conversation so I’ll meet you here on these terms

I think the major issues here are:

* Where did it show how they tested what English, how they segmented the tiers and what relation it had to this particular sort of integration and how that was quantified?
* I’m also concerned that info is repeatedly predicated on “all else being equal”(Pg17) which, particularly as an immigrant in Australia, is not a fair consideration

——

How is Singapore's English SO different that it should NOT be considered as comparable or effective in an Australian context? Particularly in an earnings scope In a global ranking it ranks 2nd in the world since 2023

[https://www.ef.com/wwen/epi/](https://www.ef.com/wwen/epi/)

As to what other countries - personally? I was expecting Scandinavian regions to be included. I mean at least Denmark, Sweden or Norway. They have a 3 language requirement in their schooling prior tertiary with a high emphasis on English. You’ll note they also rank very highly globally in that same link

Interestingly, following that - The report you rely on also mentions rewarding people who speak more than one language (2.6.8 pg35). I agree and if you do as well, those key 5 countries that had an exemption famously fall short on that and thus, integration (If only in an earnings sense)

——

Further on your point on “significant population” - I’m afraid that’s never been reliably proven (Though it can definitely be assumed), I was on a think tank having to research exactly this. Most information was off people’s assumptions of fact and flawed methodology skewed to that (Though I’m happy to be corrected)

[https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List\_of\_countries\_by\_English-speaking\_population](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_English-speaking_population) - I don’t like this as a source as many of the things it’s referring to need updating though generally still hold true

Lets take India, under the Grattan report terms of having a significant English ability and high-skilled potential (Thus on your terms making them them more likely to integrate), shouldn’t they have been given that exception as well?

At this point, I’m assuming something like “Oh but thats DIFFERENT English”. Maybe? I see it? But really so much that it didn’t honestly (if that was involved at all) deserve the terms those 5 other countries got? If there are other terms involved why weren’t those defined? Why is it that you just need a passport from these places and it can be assumed you speak the English level required?

More re a significant population of non-English speakers- the same is true of the British (And of the 4 other countries nominated). There are people who have terrible English there who got a free pass BECAUSE of their passport (As mentioned, I’ve dealt with such in my work). Isn’t that contrary to a position on successful integration via language ability as per the terms you’re relying on?

——

A final major factor is there is nothing categorising definitively what Australian English IS nor how it compares or how it’s tested or how it’s so distinct that the exceptions were anything other than at best, based on flawed data and suppositions or, at worst, completely arbitrary for the sake of political points

For example - The Grattan report took a study of several groups of several thousand people. Sometimes in sets of 100 thousands with clear sources. The exceptions? Were based on a 26 page report (That some senators didn’t even read) of a undefined survey conducted by two Liberal party members of nondescript 3000 people to represent all Australians who didn’t mention placing such exceptions at all

I think I’ve covered most of the English language material in the report but I’ll carry on with it. It’s very optimistic
Mandarin is not even in the same league as english. The entire world's economy is in english. It's a language for the whole world. China actively bans english publications like Wikipedia. They are afraid of movies in english. They separate themselves from the rest of the world. The other country speaking Chinese isn't even recognised by them. The whole point of language is to communicate to other people, so them having a big population that isn't communicating with the rest of the world is a moot point. 

So I guess we should tolerate the intolerant. They can have flags banned from the Olympics and movies censored but I guess we should accommodate them.
My previous comment wasn't about Aussie kids mate...
Reading comprehension is hard.
