The sisters add 3 golds for this country. What a race. 
the Fox sisters would be 15th on the medal table
Petition to create more Olympic cross sports that we can just barge cunts out of the way of.
Outside the top 10 ranking in the world, first Olympics and her only event, her sister eliminated in the heats (slalom GOAT, the heavy favourite and who had won the other 2 slalom golds) and a cutthroat format…  what does Noemie fox do? 

she wins THE FUCKING GOLD. The rest of the world finally thought they had a chance and Noemie went and did that lmao
Fox sweep. She won that by a mile too. Unbelievable effort and race. 

This sport is absolutely chaos and madness. It's such a good addition.
Quite literally the story of the Olympics for me. Had me getting emotional from across the world. 

In her first Olympics, her first medal event ever, Noemie delivers an incredible performance to gold in the same Olympics with her sister. 

What a moment for Fox’s, they deserve this so much. Just so happy for them! And what an event as well.
Honestly sometimes I think I might be dead inside and then something like this comes out of nowhere and moves me tears. Amazing 
Congratulations Noemie, absolute epic epic race nailing every twist and turn.  


Also the first time dad Richard broke his composure on comms and went wild by his standards cheering. 


Give the bloke that hired Richard and Myriam for Sydney 2000 a gold medal too, otherwise France or the UK would have had these special moments from Noemie and Jess 🇦🇺🇦🇺🇦🇺
That was amazing to watch! Incredible race! And it was great to see Mum and Jess join her in the water to celebrate, but they stepped out soon after to let her have her own moment.
Awesome moment. 

Definitely have the feeling she was resigned to playing second fiddle to Jess at the Olympics and came up with a great final and earned the gold.
Outstanding, 3 canoeing events and 3 gold medals between 2 sisters.
This event is easily my fav of the whole olympics, awesome job from Noemie! such a wholesome story. I'm glad she managed to win the gold because if she didn't she would be compared to her sister by the media but now she won't live in her shadow that the media would try and push.

What an epic moment.
Canoeing was the highlight of the Tokyo olympics for me, and it's only got better this time around. All class from the Fox sisters, bravo to them both!!
That was so epic. I'm not sure how I'm supposed to get to sleep now
first gold medal of the games ive witnessed live. so cool!
Absolutely one of the all time greatest olympic moments for me. Literally had tears of joy in my eyes while yelling at my TV.
Need the Fox family permission to touch a canoe from now on
the second upstream gate where she had positioned herself to be just past the 180 degrees like 200 degrees say, and the brit tries to come down to knock her off course but because she knew it would happen it only bumped her further around to the full 360 and she was away and clear and the brit couldn't recover.
Yeah the Foxes!
Soooooo good.

Worked out well that Jess got knocked out early so that the full focus could be on Noemie.
Watched this live. Loved every bit of it. This family is amazing. The Fox girls are amazing. Credit to them and the hard work and sacrifice they make to achieve their goals. Listening to their father commentate during their runs us special. He was unbiased as I have ever heard any commentator. The emotion in his voice at the end of that run by Noemie was fantastic. He is a proud Dad. As a Dad with a daughter, who I am proud of, bought a tear to my eye. 
Australian girls  at these Olympics have been outstanding. Credit to all the medallists and competitors of Australia. Love watching it.
That was fucking amazing to watch from my living room, the scenes live must have been epic! The flying Fox's clean swept the medals and have kept us in the hunt for a great result overall.
Had tears watching this. Just a great moment to watch.
You are joking, holy shit. Fuck yeah
Awesome work.
Legend.  Also do all the competitors just grab a kayak from the rental trailer on the way in? /s

I love how we Australia bats above its average for population size.
Incredible Family, really genuine love and pride for each other. 

Mum and Dad were champion kayakers. 

Dad was Australia’s kayaking/ canoe coach for years. 

Mum’s got an Olympic bronze.

Jess Fox was being interviewed,  commenting Dad is the only one without an Olympic medal.
😂
10m platform diving.


"Up next we have Chen lining up for her 5th dive. It's a triple pike - by god that's Melissa Wu's music"
Gymnastics floor cross. It would be utterly nuts 😆
Cycling, but with lances.

  
Men's speed skating already exists for the Winter games (praise be to Bradbury)
Was thinking the same lol. Just when you think you're in with a good chance, the fave's sister fucks you up.
>  her sister eliminated in the heats

Noemie was in that heat. Tiny bit of difference at the end and they would have gone 1-2(with Noemie in the lead).
You might say they "Out Foxed" them
Easily the favourite moment of this olympics for me. It was  a better than storybook ending
Won it playing smart too. Went for the clean line rather than trying bump the Brit out of the way at the first upstream.


Then when the Brit went for a desperate lunge on her at the last upstream (fair enough!) Noemi completely outfoxed her! Ha
Honestly it’s such a good watch.
The Fox girls and Saya in the BMX.
Here in the States and I was moved to tears. That story and journey doesn’t get much better than what we’ve just seen.
So good
Honestly it’s crazy to think about how one hiring meant the difference between an Australian Olympic moment or another’s.
Richard Fox came 4th in Barcelona for Great Britain, so close!

FYI Richard and Myriam moved to Australia when he was hired in 1997 (started 1998) to coach Australian Canoeing in the lead up to Sydney, bringing 3 year old Jess and baby Noemie with them. They were only planning to be in Australia "a few years" but they never left. We're so bloody lucky to have them. Amazing family.
Im sure you know, but if anyone doesn’t - her dad is the commentator for the TV broadcast too. Third time this week he’s run off from the commentary position to celebrate with his family after calling one of his daughters over the line. 
> Jess Fox was being interviewed, commenting Dad is the only one without an Olympic medal. 😂

He was a bit unlucky because the slalom got introduced to the Olympics at the end of his career.
He's like the anti-Jos Verstappen! 


Such a likeable family.
"Remco Evenepoel is about to break away from the Peleton here. 


Oh deary me he's been run off the road into a parked car by Michael Matthews"
I just picture them running up behind them and pushing them off and they panic try doing something and scraping it together on the spot
"RKO off the 3m board, by God almighty!"
biathlon cross. get in the way? .22 round in the arse.
That’s what OP is saying. “Her sister (Jessica) eliminated in the heats” 

Edit: remember the paragraph is written as a list
Just 2nd to Saya Sakakibara for me, the Sakakibara's have been through all hell the last 4-5 years
Also big respect to the Brit for choosing to get a bronze fighting for gold rather than just playing it safe and sticking with silver. Courageous mindset and absolutely elevated the race.
Definitely a toss up between the two!
It's something so many people can relate to.


Always playing second fiddle to someone more successful in your family/friends/work and then she gets her one chance and just absolutely nails it and creates her own legacy.


Something that most of us can only dream of (albeit on a much smaller scale!).
And they had to relocate from Europe to Penrith!
I’d say he Is happy with his lot in life. 

He would be the proudest Dad/ husband in world ATM.
yeah he was at the top of the sport for the 80s, and did really well to still get 4th at Barcelona when it was introduced.
Devo we wouldn't get to hear Phil Liggett commentate road race cross.
To be fair, some of the sprint finishers are really not that far off from that.
This already happens in cycling, his name is Jasper Phillipsen
Petition to introduce new classes of biathlon with increasing levels of firepower. Watch them struggle to set up a mortar tube. Extra fun in snow.
They were both in heat 3. Top 2 go through. Noemie got first and Jessica got Fourth.
Noemie even gave Saya a shoutout that, I think it inspired her to go for it.
very good shout
That family had me in tears, for years now. They finally got to That gold medal race and Saya had immense pressure on her. What does she do! She goes out and wins it. Best story ever, so much heartache and struggle. These families deserve all the accolades for supporting the girls who wear the Gold for Australia. All the hard work and sacrifice paying dividends in the long run.
she wasn't aware that Lilik had been relegated at that point, so she was giving up a chance at any medal.
One of the reasons why I love the Olympics , and sports so much is its capacity to inspire us. 

We may not be able to achieve the athletic feats they do, but we can always inspire to embody the traits they display. 

Such a beautiful moment.
Deciding to stay in Penrith is crazy 😂
Aaaah yes Penrith, the Switzerland of Australia as they say. (by they I mean absolutely no one)
As a Dad, he sounds like a Champion Dad. He doesn't need Gold Medals. His wife and daughters already had all the gold they needed. This family is love.
Naomi totally fucked her on the last turn lol. She threw the bollard to the side so the Brit couldn’t get around it. Good killer instinct. Looked like it was deliberate too.
that's where the olympic whitewater course was built, so it makes sense to be really close to it.
Yeah it’s pretty much the only whitewater course in the country.
