Hi everyone, I am currently in the Maldives on holiday and have purchased a handmade photo album. It is made out of dried banana tree leaves, palm leaf strings, coconut stems, cinnamon binding and handmade husk paper. 
Is this allowed to be brought into Australia? It is in its original plastic packaging.

Thank you 
Declare it. There might also be a cost with a suitable sort of treatment such as gamma radiation to ensure no pathogens or pests are hiding in it. If in doubt you can  probably contact Australian Border Force to clarify.
You'll have to declare it
I brought back a woven palm frond bag from Vanuatu. Declared it. They looked it over carefully and then BASHED it on the steel table for a while and checked carefully through what fell out, looking for bugs (or bug bits or poo or eggs, etc). Didn’t find anything, let me keep it. 

That’s my only experience along those lines, but may be helpful!
Declare it, let them decide.
The product would have to have been processed in such a way as to kill any insects or plant based diseases that usually get killed in mass production facilities.  


As always, if you bring it, DECLARE it on the passenger form, at the very least they say no, and dispose of it.  Where people get in to trouble is to declare NO, then get caught.  


When I originally came to Australia, the declaration specified wooden products and Chocolate.  I had a wooden Boomerang, and some cadbury's chocolate.  Customs were like "Nope that's all good", and even made a snarky comment about the boomerang that actually came back :)  


If you are honest with customs, they are cool with you.
Banana leaft will probably get them more interested than anything.  Maybe 50/50 they take issue
If you want to find out, check BICON to see if there are any restrictions/conditions on importing it. You can access it here: https://bicon.agriculture.gov.au/

As it has plant matter it will probably be regulated, but sometimes conditions are just that the thing has no dirt and is otherwise clean. The officers would inspect it to see if it meets those conditions/ if there is any risk posed by the good. If there is risk, there will be steps to manage it like treatment, re-export or destruction.
I once declared my muddy hiking boots. The border agent asked what I'd been doing with them. 


"I was deworming baby goats in rural Kalimantan." (Indonesian Borneo)


"Ah that's fine, go through."


🤷‍♀️


Just declare and take your chances. 
Dried banana leaves? Absolutely not. Banana leaves are some of the highest risk items you can bring in as all bananas are functionally clones so any pathogens on the leaves could kill the entire banana stock in the country.


Declare it to a biosecurity officer
Banana leaves are a red flag. Probably not without treatment
If not sure...DECLARE!
I brought a wooden omamori back from Japan and went through the process of declaring it. The guy there said it was fine as long as it didn’t have bark or anything on it. Safest way is to just talk to them. I’m sure it’s fine.
If in doubt, declare. 
Cover your ass with all bases.


I myself go as far as declaring any confectionery I'm bringing in 😂🤷‍♂️

AQIS/ABF would prefer you be honest with them about what you have, rather than wasting their time with bullshit which will just get you into trouble anyway.
Tell them I said it's ok
It sounds like it would need treatment. Pretty pricey, not sure it's worth it
Very unlikely
BICON and work it out
Just echoing the other "DECLARE IT!" advice. I've bought souvenirs back from overseas where I wasn't totally sure they'd pass quarantine muster and declared them, and almost every time customs have said "That's fine, thank you for declaring it". There's been maybe two or three times they've said "Sorry, you can't bring that in" and taken it, but because I had declared it there were no issues, and the staff were always friendly and professional about it.
Worth checking, maybe make some calls. Definitely declare it
Declare it for sure ..
Just know that you might not be able to keep it
Always just declare it
It’s a no brainer

They may end up fumigating it if necessary but don’t take the risk for your self and otbers
Seeing as it's processed and dried it should be fine once you've declared it and theyve had a look
Nope
If not it looks pretty tasty... lots of good roughage as well.
Came back from Cambodia with baskets that we wove ourselves from some leaves/plants, declared it and they let us keep it. Declare it and usually it’s alright
Id say no
I’ve brought hand woven baskets back from Africa with no issues. You must declare it to Customs and Quarantine (tick the box on your arrival form). I don’t think you’ll have any issues. They are worried about live bugs hiding in wooden articles and flowers as an example. This is not a risk but you must declare it
Don’t declare small shit just a hastle
Absolutely not. It contains banana. That's a strict "Do Not Pass Go".
No
Nope.
Usually if it’s dead / dried it’s fine
Uhhh as a Aussie I think you can as long as it isn’t the actual banana I think u can I’m not sure tho
No. AQIS will destroy it
You might get to keep it or you might not.  For the sake of our agricultural sector and native species just declare it.  But if you need more convincing:

>Under Commonwealth law, financial penalties, including infringement notice amounts, are calculated in ‘penalty units’. Section 4AA of the *Crimes Act 1914* sets the dollar amount of one penalty unit. As of 1 July 2023 the amount of one penalty unit is set at $313.

>The amount payable under an infringement notice is specified in the notice. The minimum amount for Infringement notices issued at the airport for the alleged contravention of s 126(2), s 128(2), s 532(1) or s 533(1) of the Biosecurity Act is 2 penalty units ($626). However, if a traveller fails to declare goods of a kind known to pose a high level of biosecurity risk, and in doing so allegedly contravenes s 532 (1) or s 533 (1), the infringement notice amount increases to 6 penalty units ($1,878) or 12 penalty units ($3,756) depending on the risk of the goods. If a traveller conceals conditionally non-prohibited goods that are brought or imported into Australian territory, and in doing so allegedly contravenes s 186A(1), the infringement notice amount increases to 20 penalty units ($6,260).

>The amount payable on an infringement notice is not discretionary.  It is important to note that biosecurity officers do not have the legal authority to make decisions on how many penalty units will apply to each infringement notice.
And once the nice people from AQIS have a look at it they will make their decision 
We lost a lamp shade because it had live bugs but we’re allowed to keep another because the bugs were dead. The customs guy suggested next time, before we depart put it in a plastic bag, spray bug killer, tie up the bag and let it sit for a while.
Literally had the same experience with a bag from Vanuatu, they were happy were declared it - bashed it on a table then let us keep it.
Exactly the same experience with a woven bag I bought from the Solomons. Except things _did_ fall out and proceed to crawl about the table. I told them to burn it.
Yep. If you declare it and it is OK then they tell you that, if you declare it and it isn't OK, they will simply take it. I had that coming back from Malaysia with a wooden ornament I had seen on sale in Perth but they took it away. Declared, so no fine.

Only if it is not declared will you get into trouble. Certainly don't wanna end up on Border Security lol
Slightly off topic but i found it interesting that apparently banana has changed so much that the prominent variety these days is completely different to the one of lile 20-30 years ago.


Nostalgic flavour is a real thing.
Whenever this topic comes up I refer to the recent incident where someone coming in from Singapore (?) had a half-eaten Subway sandwich in their bag which they didn't declare - it cost them 1000s in fines 

(I like to think there was more going on in that case - that the travellers started kicking up a stink so it escalated to the fine)
If it's anything like my experience they'll just look at the card and ask what you have
Oh, interesting! Well then, maybe OP should open their album and make sure any bugs are dead ☠️
That’s what happened to me! Lady looked at my card, asked me what I was declaring and 3 items in just told me to keep going.

I thought, shit that would be easy to get away with.
"you sure you don't want to hear about the heroin?"
Nah they already xrayed your bags
Biosecurity people don't care about your drugs! (Unless its still in  a semi viable plant form)
