Simple question, what state do you think is the best? 

Some examples to measure it on: 

Standard of living, Transport, Laws, People, Culture, Temperature etc.

Be unbiased. Give me factual reasons for why you like it. 

Take into account towns, nor just the big cities in the area. 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Liquid.  liquid is definitely the best state.
Denial. 
Euphoria
Vegetative
Chart 5 on the page [here](https://population.gov.au/data-and-forecasts/key-data-releases/national-state-and-territory-population-march-2023) shows where _Australians_ move to. In summary they leave NSW, ACT and Tasmania and go to Queensland and WA. SA and Victoria are pretty neutral.
Best waterways, coastal, rivers, lakes, bays and harbours it's hands down NSW. 


People is probably SA.  I've met the loveliest people there. 


Islands is Qld, you cant beat the sheer number of beautiful clear waters from Bundy to the top.


WA is vast and fairly untouched, so is probably the state with the most promising future.


Tassie is gorgeous,  but cold. So it's great if you like that weather.


Victoria (where I am) is the sporting capital......if AFL is your go? Otherwise it has some good coast and nice mountains, but overall it's pretty dark. We're also the chip state.....as in chip on our shoulder. When it comes to whinging, we win gold! And we over exaggerate our "culture capital" status. All capital cities have great restaurants and coffee shops. 
Comatose.
In a state of being absolutely pissed? Some would say yes, others would warn of health impacts. Either way, ensure you take steps to remain safe and keep others safe.
Based on the national internal migration figures, more people want to move to Queensland than move away from it. And more people want to move to Queensland than any other state.
I could only be happy living in Sydney or Melbourne, but that's mainly because I live off live music and obviously the two biggest cities are going to have the most going on.
Perpetual bliss.
None of em. Move to another country
Queensland. Blue skies nearly every day of the year. Beautiful weather. Beautiful beaches. Gorgeous islands and reefs. Easy access to SEA. Awesome hiking and climbing. Beautiful mountains, Waterfalls, and rainforests. Pretty good local arts scene in SEQ. .50c public transport fares. Good wages for the health sector. Theme parks. Pretty laid back attitudes (worse since Covid though). Everything has become a lot more expensive since covid though.
Plasma.
Comatose.
Everyone eventually moves to Qld
Comatose.
All the states are equally worse than the glorious territories
[deleted]
Also the best state to have a beer in.
Plasma - otherwise we wouldn’t have a sun. Without the sun we’d all be dead. 

All hail the sun!
That sounds exhausting
Qld is a beautiful place filled with complete fuck wits. If we could remove every Queenslander the state would be amazing.
Didn't realise that Adelaide, Melbourne and Perth were states.
Beer needs gas too or it's in a pretty sorry state.
I would agree that plasma is the most important, but that does not necessarily equal "best" state.
We've had a lot of interstate migration in the last few years. Are they all fuckwits too?
