
I hate living in the past.
Not that I use cannabis although I can’t be the only one who sees the hypocrisy of companies growing it here and selling it to overseas markets where it is legal while being illegal for recreational use here. WTF.
Our government actively choosing to throw billions of dollars in potential taxes down the drain.
It’s not illegal if the government makes money from it!!
So awesome being sick and having to chomp oxycodone, laxative/stool softeners, panadol and sleeping tablets to "live" when one little weed gummy would solve my problems a lot better.


By time I'm healthy from my primary issue I'm going to have to deal with all the problems I am building right now every day in my body.


Thanks backward Australia!


(Yes, I could pursue medical canabis but am concerned about impact to my insurances and career)
Frankly the only approach *backed by science* is legalisation and harm minimisation for *all* drugs. Would massively reduce overdoses, prison populations, police duty backlogs, increase taxes and decrease expenditure but *no*, we need to stick tight to America's fucking taint on this shit.
I'm seeing the ADF standing around cannabis crops guarding them with guns and dogs, using the experience gained from guarding Opium crops in Afghanistan.
if only there were other places who'd forged ahead so we could see how well the legalisation step would work out. Anyone? Bueller?
[deleted]
Vote LCP people.
Lol, anything for another boom and bust cycle. The USA has already done it, so why not here.
When was the last time anyone alive or dead ever utter the phrase 'YO CHECK OUT THIS AUSTRALIAN STRAIN' never happened, probably never will.

Australian cannabis standards is so dogshit compared to the rest of the world, nobody buying this shit.
Eh you get used to it after awhile.
Big Alcohol and Big Tobacco their poli cronies don't want you forming coping mechanisms outside their products.

Plus cannabis makes you sleepy and loving which doesn't help anyone politically speaking.
And its the party of the "farmers" who constantly lobby against decriminalisation because they want to side with the religious loony right wing groups for donations and support. Again not acting in the interests of farmers and Australians. 

Meanwhile Barnaby the drunk lays in the gutter while politicians and their apparatchiks are having a cocaine orgy but ordinary people    cant avail themselves of  the use of cannabis for leisure or for pleasure in a sensible manner. Again Australia ignoring evidence based policy that works while we think puritan do nothing luddite thinking is governing!
Australia gave up making sense a long time ago.
It's a massive scam.  On a medical prescription it's legal as long as you buy it from who they say you can.  


If you grow it and be self sufficient, that's illegal.  
Yes but we are great at selling our products and natural resources for a pittance to international companies so we can then buy them back at greatly inflated costs. I wouldn't be surprised if one of those European companies buys cheap cannabis from Australia, repackages it and sells it back to the Australian medical market for a massive profit.
Well that's the approach they use with all multinationals.
Yeah but that's everybody's billion. They'll happily throw it away so their mates get a million, then turn around and tell us we can't afford to run the country better.
We still have too many backwards politicians in office who are living in the dark ages. Shouldve been legalised years ago.
Psshhtt...Taxes don't pay for their Yachts and Mansions...Alcohol and Tobacco lobbies do...
Yes. But think of the millions in personal profit to gain.  /S
Not to mention all the tax SAVINGS from making it legal and not wasting police time & resources on it. As the saying goes; they could focus on catching *real* criminals.
They're too busy sucking the cocks of the alcohol and gambling lobbies.
I'm going to disagree with that.  In Australia, in 2024 everyone who wants to do weed is doing weed.  Legalisation wouldn't increase the market at all.


The system in place is the best for... I'm not sure, but not you or I
If your career will be impacted by medicinal cannabidiol then recreational marijuana is also gonna impact it. Just go see a gp and discuss it.
What job are you in that you’d have to disclose? I’m on medicinal and I don’t have to tell my employer shit about it. However, I only take it at night.
I mean, 50% of US states have legalized marijuana now, so we’re doing even worse than America on this now
Why bring the US into this? Australia’s backwardness is our own doing.
They guard opium crops in Australia too.
Yeah there is plenty of other countries which have tried it - but the results aren't at all convincing yet. Sure the economic benefits of selling weed is easily understood, hell this article is essentially advertising it. But the societal impact studies of other countries is very hit and miss.   
  
If it was cut and dry then Labour would actually platform it, but as it stands now there is way too much ammunition against it that Liberals would capitalise on.
US going full legal won't have much affect on Australian politicians. We tend to follow the UK's lead with things like this.
I bet the cannabis will turn feral and proliferate just like the deer, goats, camels and ostriches.
I shall be the first then.. Everyone should try Jade by tasman botanics.
Yeah that Kentucky Turbo Blueberry might be the shit but it costs $100 a bag, while that cheap ass Aussie shit still fucks you up for quarter of the price...
You left out puritans, wowsers and sick control freaks. Who, as far as I can tell, make up a solid third of Australians. How else can you explain Scott Morrison getting to be PM?
> Australia gave up making sense a long time ago.

JUST CANT BE OVERSTATED ENOUGH :/
The punishments for growing Tobacco for personal use are insane.
I know a lot of people who dont go for many reasons. There's still a lot of market left. Certainly, there's a shit tone of people who got onto medical weed though
I still think some of the profits of that should go towards hospitals and schools instead of enriching organised crime syndicates.  And save money to arrest and prosecution of harmless “criminals.”
Probably just paranoia they'd find out somehow. My job doesn't do drug testing. I am however concerned it would stop possible insurance payouts - income protection, TPD, death etc in super annuation.  Same thing if I got into a car accident - deemed at fault as they can't test for actual impact to your ability to drive.


I think I'm more nervous about seeming like I'm drug seeking to my GP - or if I went to one of those companies who prescribe onlinr - because my GP can see I did it due to it being scheduled, it impacting my doctor relationship (making me seem like im a drug seeker).


It shouldn't be this hard and it only is because we are so backwards, there should be no fear in asking a medical professional... I hope we become more progressive soon.


I dont even want flower / I want suble stuff like edibles 


I expect to be better from my current problem within 3 months at least and I've suffered from anxiety for 42 years already whays a few more - hah.  :)
You can’t legally drive a car on medicinal cannabis.  If you ever got into a major accident and they did a urine or blood test, you’re insurer is going to laugh and wipe their hands of you and you’d possibly see a criminal conviction.  Saliva wipes only work for. Few hours but if something ever happened where you needed a urine or blood sample, you’d be screwed.

I had a job previously that did urine samples often and there was a list of drugs, including prescription drugs that weren’t allowed to show or you would be out.
Oh yeah I know, but it's funnier that they guarded opium crops in Afghanistan.
Show us the misses.
I love how we follow the US on all the bullshit but not the fun stuff.
Anyone who has outdoor interests knows that it occurs naturally, albeit rarely. It just doesn't grow that well without extra care  and it is forever being harvested where ever found.
That's the attitude that perpetuates the dogshit black market weed in this country, people not caring what they get as long as it loosely resembles weed.
Anxiety is on the list of allowed conditions! Even if your current problem resolves, anxiety might qualify you. 

I went to my GP and said I was wanting to explore it because I have a long history of treatment resistant depression and treatment resistant OCD. I also have osteoarthritis which it turns out also qualifies me. My GP has seen me go through seven different types of psych meds plus transcranial magnetic stimulation so he knows I’m not some drug seeker, I’ve literally tried it all 😂
You can on CBD oil only products. It’s the ones with THC that show up on a swab test
Gat dang, weed aficionado haha. Like getting fussy about booze, if you know enough to be too fussy, you have a problem that needs to be managed and one of the best ways to manage it to avoid indulging fussiness.
I guess I should stop being a big baby and broach the subject... what's the worst that can happen?


Tbh i have typically sourced illegally but I honestly don't want to smoke flower  - its just all i have had access to previously / my current issue is respiratoty/lung related - hence  the desire for gummies or oils or something I can't get without help.


Asking a question gotta be better than getting myself hooked on sleeping tabs, right? Even worse, oxycodone and its drowsy affect!
It shows in urine or blood though, yeah?
Mate, you can get access to this very easily if you want to. There are plenty of clinics that will prescribe oil, gummies, wafers etc. you will have zero issues getting prescribed these if you want. I am with acacia medical who have been good for me. If you want anymore info, DM me
