The article mentioned double standards in the sport.

Lol does anyone else feel that "standard" is essentially default fashion for men ie. Shorts and tee, pretty much all the time?

Lol are some people only noticing now that men's fashion is baggy, muted and covert, where as women get thousands of options?

Men's fashion sucks. 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
The wedgies alone would have me protesting. Surely shorts - even fitted Lycra ones - would be more practical for running, jumping, diving into the sand or whatever than having to constantly pick the bikini bottoms out of your arse.
What's the point of this post ?  What article are you referring to ?

Would you like males to have to option to wear a bikini while playing beach volleyball??

Edit: Since you want more variety for male beach volleyball players,  please see link below. 

https://funnyordie.com/2016/08/18/36883/if-men-had-to-wear-womens-olympic-uniforms-beach-volleyball/?amp=1
This has been a conversation for a long time, but it usually focusses more on the aspect of women also being forced into impractical sportswear for the sakes of tradition, modesty, or skimpiness.

Beach volleyballers getting forced into skimpy bikinis, women on their period having to wear white skirts at Wimbledon, Islamic women having to manage full body cover and headgear in boiling temperatures...

Yes, men's fashion is also really disappointing in terms of the lack of flair, range and colour. There are options out there if you want to experiment a little more but you have to look.

Also... non-political flair? Gender presentation and politics is inherently pretty political.
This wasn't a problem in ancient Greece, everyone competed nude.
Lol you saw what happened when the pole vaulters wang hit the bar, maybe a bikini bottom could have prevented that...
You don’t need your ass out to play volley ball. They should be able to wear longer or even baggier bottoms if they want to. Nobody should really be forced to wear anything IMO. In the case of athletics it makes sense, but there has to be a range of options to accomodate the variable wants and needs of athletes 
This is an odd thing to try to start a brigade for homie, id say let the people it actually affects worry about it and mind your own space in the pond
Men's fashion doesn't actually suck, straight men are just too sensitive to try the options which exist for men.
I guess this is fashion in general, and it's fair to have objections from both sides. Stuff for men tends to have the advantage of comfort and practicality, whereas stuff for women is more often interesting and flashy. When it comes to uniforms, I think all options should be available for everyone. Then it's fair.
Are they actually not allowed to choose other styles?  Or is this just a pointless whinge where the athletes in question have already determined what gear suits them best?
But if men wore skin tight shorts there would be complaints that the men are harassing women .
Inside you there are two wolves:
1) women’s Olympic uniforms are unnecessarily revealing compared to the men’s uniforms, why aren’t they allowed to choose baggy shorts
2) you want to see more moose knuckle.
>Would you like males to have to option to wear a bikini while playing beach volleyball??

Hell yeah
How do you manage the full body covering and temperature issue? If you scheduled things at different times you’d find a change to manipulate that rule. Ultimately it is an opinion and a choice.

I think the uniform issue is fair complaint, I don’t know why they mandated the bikini sizes except as a ploy to chase the entertainment dollar at the expense of the legitimacy of the sport.
So really the discussion should be on how conservative Olympic dress standards have become.
We're there many women competing in ancient Greece?
My wife and I were discussing that. Surely its a fairly common part of the body to hit the bar, so you think they'd be strapping their junk down as much as possible.
There are options. When it's cold they'll wear skins. But I know that when Taliqua Clancy has been asked about it she said she's more comfortable wearing a bikini. If the athletes are comfortable then who cares what anybody else thinks.
This is the real answer.
Did you mean to type sensible there?
I agree all the option should be available to everyone.

But I've always thought the opposite when it comes to comfort of sportswear.  Men are forced to wear shorts which can be very uncomfortable when you have balls, as the seam pulls up when you move your legs apart.  Also the legs of shorts pull on the thighs.  They're stretchy so the impact on performance is minimal, but I personally find the pulling/rubbing sensation uncomfortable. In a logical world skirts and dresses would have been mens clothing.  We're also not allowed to wear briefs or spandex/yoga pants outside of swimming events, short shorts is the most flexible clothing we have for our lower half.
Qatar wore head coverings so you can choose whatever
They can choose bikinis or shorts/long sleeve.
Go outside
Release the banana hammocks
…as possible
No, I meant to type sensitive.

Straight men complaining about mens fashion being terrible are too sensitive to being called names for wearing the mens fashion that is actually out there and available.
True. We're so firm on the rules that we won't even compromise on them for professional athletic wear. It would be interesting to do a study and find out what's actually ideal in terms of performance.
Plenty of male athletes wear compression shorts for this reason.
What’s your point?  With no context it’s impossible to tell if the OP wanted women to have the option to wear loose fitting stuff like the guys, or whether he wanted the guys to wear revealing skin tight stuff like the women.
Surely gay men are far more sensitive about men's fashion, than straight men.
I used to train powerlifting in my garage and switching from normal shorts to compression shorts was a gamechanger for deadlifts and squats. Didn't have to deal with the bar getting caught up on my shorts as it came up my thighs on deads, or with shorts bunching up uncomfortably on both exercises as you squat down.
Sprinting gives us some insight into that.  Sprinting comes down to tenths of a second so the minimal impact of shorts becomes a deciding factor, and they do away with shorts in favour of spandex.  However women's sprinting remove the legs entirely and go with briefs.

This could go in the opposite direction if they didn't restrict material type and had some special material that reduces air friction, but as with swimming that's probably banned.
No, because Gay Men will wear the fashion options available without being sensitive over being called Gay for it.

Where as the people to complain about Mens Fashion won't wear them.
