Seeking advice on first-time ski trip to Niseko, Japan

My misso and I are planning our first snow experience. I'd appreciate feedback on this Flight Centre package:

Price: $6,951 for 7 nights (01-Feb-2025 to 08-Feb-2025) Includes:

* Return airport transfers (with specific arrival/departure time restrictions)
* Accommodation at Always Niseko Hotel (Deluxe Niseko Room, breakfast included)
* Free shuttle to ski lifts
* 3 half day lessons each

Gear rental not included. 

Is this a reasonable price? 

Any other tips for first-time visitors to Niseko would be appreciated.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Can most definitely get it cheaper if you organise it yourself
If it's your first time I recommend staying in Hirafu as you will have more food and drink options.

Otherwise, Niseko Village is nice for ski in and out. Greenleaf is basic, but has a great rotenburo.

If you can get someone to help you in Japanese, the Japanese Rakuten site is good for bookings: 
https://travel.rakuten.co.jp/yado/hokkaido/niseko.html

However, the English site sucks. Anyway, your Always Niseko is an incredibly cheap hotel:  https://travel.rakuten.co.jp/HOTEL/158763/158763.html?l-id=hotelList_3_158763

But does get decent reviews, as Japanese review sites tend to not be "automatic 5 stars" like the English language website norm.
/r/JapanTravel would probably be more helpful

much cheaper if you plan and book everything yourself though.

Also, I'd skip Niseko and Hakuba, because at this point they're just a cold version of Bali.
Niseko, gorgeous and the snow is like clouds though do see Sapporo and its Ice festival. Worth the visit!
I don't have any advice whatsoever as I've not yet been myself, but I just want to say I'm envious and fuck you (not seriously fuck you of course hahaha). I'm really hoping to get myself over there around Feb next year but not quite in the position to go booking anything in just yet. Fingers crossed! Hope your trip comes together nicely and goes as well as you'd hoped.
That’s a high price.
How many days lift tickets?
By way of background, I went to Niseko 2012/2013 and 2014/2015 seasons,  visited a few resorts in Hakuba Valley (Hakuba47, Hakuba Hapo-one + Iwatake) and went to Rusutsu 2018/2019 season. It's been a whilte since I've been  to Japan to snowboard. I travelled solo when I went. I am planning either to travel to Japan solo again or go with a group tour provider like [Sessions and Workshops - Progression Sessions](https://progressionsessions.fun/sessions-and-workshops/) 2024/2025 season. 

From memory I spent anywhere from $1500- $4000 snowboarding in Niseko for about two weeks, not including airfare. Depending on the type of accom the price varied greatly. 



I have travelled on a tight budget, including hostel mixed dorm share accom. w/ 6 - 8 ppl. When I say 'budget' I'm talking, tins of tuna, ramen, not eating out, money spent on lift passes/transport mainly. I have also travelled without budgeting, preferring peace and quiet/privacy which increased the cost substantially - i.e., for one week I recall the amount being about $4000, including lift passes, accommodation and transport/food.  Accommodation was the lion's share of the cost, from memory about $3000 - Hilton Niseko - for double bed, ensuite. This was about a decade ago, and it's much more expensive now.... 

  
Accommodation can be quite expensive in Niseko if not shared accom. in general, on that basis alone the price you've quoted while not cheap isn't too steep so as to be unreasonable. It's for two people after all. I'd say it sits perfectly inbetween. It is worth being comfortable, and accommodation can make/break holidays, so splashing extra cash for a quiet and peaceful place to relax after a sometimes exhausting day on mountain is totally worth it. 

  
Also, I've looked at group tours and for a single booking of about 7 days (not including airfare) the price is about $5000 (rounding up/down) - if preferring your own room/no shared room. Some of the tours however include level 3 instructors though, so that's a MASSIVE bonus.

  
My 5 cents is that sometimes it is fun to plan every little detail of your trip, sometimes it's even better if someone else does that for you. For the convenience I'd pay extra; it appears you just have flights/lift passes to think about. While yes, I agree with another redditor that booking accom yourself for the both of you may be a little cheaper however, by the time you book the other extras, like shuttle access to the lift, lessons, transfers to/from the airport you're looking at about the same price for two people. 

  
In short, it ain't bad. It's your first snow experience after all and it's in your interest to have a good time and not stress. Let the travel agents do their job. 

Tip is to make the most of the lessons included in your package and take advantage of having access to an instructor on mountain who knows the terrain. Also, Niseko really is an international resort so you won't have any issues with there being a language barrier - English is spoken within the confines of the resort. 

  
In terms of travel to Niseko from Australia, I'd fly direct to Narita Airport, then fly to Sapporo (New Chitose Airport) and catch the bus to Niseko. I prefer direct flights, so I'll just find the airline and the location that has this option; @ the moment Jetstar out of Cairns to Narita would be my pick. 

Have an amazing time! Niseko is fantastic! An all-round good experience and ticks all the boxes imho! What fun!
$4000 or less , feb is low season in japan
Absolutely, $7k is insane
Thank you!
In comparison to? What’s the expected price? 
All days. Sorry forgot to specify. 
