
Never watched a surfing competition, until this. 


What utter bullshit. There were like zero waves. He just sat there praying for one but Poseidon must've been playing his Xbox or some shit.
Would it be safe to guess that the surfing at "Brisbane" will be at Surfers Paradise?
Phryne will be delighted!
There were waves. Jack unfortunately gave the local Tahitian too much space on the inside for the first one that came through - the best one of the heat.


That's where he lost it. Letting your opponent score a 9.5 ride when there's no set priority is a pretty unfortunate error.


Jack needed to push him deeper so he wouldn't make it. Or get on his inside and jag it himself (he wouldn't have made it on his backhand, but he would have denied the other bloke getting a huge lead).


After that when Kauli got the 8 point ride straight after Jack just had to wait and hope that another big wave came along - and unfortunately it didn't.


But if Jack was a little more aggressive in that opening exchange I think we would have seen a bit more of a dog fight and more surfing throughout the heat.
And the final had more swell than the semis. 

Would be tough in those conditions.
Pro surfing has always been a tough watch and always will be. I could go into the details of how you think it should be improved but I doubt you or anyone really cares. Best to stick to proven TV sports if you want that type of a format.
I can’t believe what I just watched. Seriously? Any professional surfers out there please explain how this is fair?

Robinson caught one wave then just sat there for the next 21 minutes until time ran out?
And this was after the other dude who was born on that beach somehow zoomed to a “priority” position to catch the only decent wave? WTF?

Why don’t they toss a coin to see who goes first? Then stay out there until they’ve caught the same number of waves?

Surfers are so chill that they’ll all probably say “oh well, Mother Nature is fickle, that’s life” (which is exactly what Robinson said with a big smile). Seems to me this is a classic case of the ruling body disappearing up it’s own arse and creating rules which ignore the very premise of what constitutes a sports competition. Gnarly.
I certainly hope not, it’s nowhere near the best swell on the Gold Coast let alone the wider south east coast line
France did a great job in putting the surfing at the best surfing spot.  This resulted in day 3 heats being the best Olympic surfing we have ever seen.

I think Queensland should do the same.  Pick the beach that will have the most consistent waves.  Having it away from Brisbane / Gold Coast will also make it easier to find accomodation.

Surfers Paradise is where they should do Beach Volleyball and Triathlon not surfing.
Coolangatta.  Snapper or dbah
Safe to say no. Surfers Paradise is actually by far the worst place to surf on the whole Gold Coast. 

Further south at Coolangatta is a place called The Superbank. It's one the best quality, most consistent surf spots on Earth. I dare say, it will be held there.
We are lucky in QLD where we have great choice of surfing up and down the coast. Sunny coast, Gold Coast, Hervey Bay, well pretty much everywhere.
[removed]
There's fuck all waves to be surfed in Surfers Paradise, probably Currumbin Alley or Snapper.
You could not be more wrong. Jack let Kauli go the smaller but decent one on the inside. Kauli paddled into it and pulled back, effectively handing Jack the first priority of the heat. 

Well that's how it should have been handled but the priority was not given. It was a fucken stitch up!
That put Kauli on the inside for the set. 

Ratso Buchanon or whoever did the prioroity needs to be dragged though the lagoon by a 15 foot Chopes monster.

Full stitch up!!!!
Robbo won the semi final with the same tactic. Mother nature is fickle but in normal surf comps they have more time to wait for great waves that unfortunately they don't get in the Olympics.
No chance they do dbah, qld government would collectively have an aneurysm
Where on earth in Hervey Bay are you surfing?
And good weather compared to place like Victoria where going surfing in cold Southern Ocean waters has few attractions.  Anyone living near warm ocean waters with good weather is very lucky. I gave up diving in Victoria because I just hated wearing a thick suit and I also hated the  general coldness aspect of any water sport. Then I took up sailing and gave that away as a joke because in summer the winds were always light or non existent on the bay. Unlike Sydney, Perth and Qld that gets nice constant winds across their waters. If you a ocean person I would not recommend you come live in Victoria, ah the fishing is also crap and largely fished and netted out!
Your [comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/1el4sav/australias_jack_robinson_claims_silver_medal_in/lgpvcaz/?context=3) in /r/australia was automatically removed because you used a URL shortener or content cache.

These are not permitted in /r/australia as they impair our ability to enforce link blacklists.

Please re-post your comment using direct, full-length URL's only.


*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Definitely a line ball call. And he was fucking unlucky he didn't get that one.


Felt he could have sold him on it a bit more.


Watch the replay of the first wave Kauli gets though. 


Jack paddles to his left 5m towards the shoulder hoping to catch it too.



He needed to hold position and force Kauli to take off too deep.


But that extra 5m towards the peak that he allowed Kauli to take put him in the perfect spot.


I'm on your side mate - definitely a stitch up but Jack did make an error on that first wave Kauli got.
Yes Jack should have gone after him to force the take off. I've tried to rewatch it but the replay is only highlights.
The full heat replay is on the 9now app under surfing.


There's also 4 highlight options but also the full 35 mins
cheers.
No worries. Check out what I mean about Kauli's first wave. 


Jack is normally really good at not giving them an inch but he does uncharacteristically give him just a bit too much room here.


Fucking sucks, cos I feel if he got that first wave (priority awarded) he wins Gold 
