
Lol 40 fucking percent of the entire university student population?!

Fuck me dead.
I wonder whether the government will also fund more research to make up for the lost revenue. I suspect that they will not, because our current crop of politicians do not value research all that much.
Next new policy - new skilled worker visa to address critical shortage of Uber drivers
Now do TAFE and RTOs
I see the need for capping international students, but this also has to be done alongside increased funding for our universities.

Currently, the amount of money that universities get for domestic students is not enough to cover the cost the universities incur for educating said students. They literally take a loss on each domestic student. They make up for this by seeking out other income streams, the largest of which is international students. They're not seeking out international students to be money-grubbing, they're seeking them out because they literally don't get enough funding from government.

I'd love it if our universities had more to offer domestic students, but they've been bled dry by 30 years of neoliberal government. Labor hasn't shown a significant enough increase in funding to address the problem, and now that they're cutting international student numbers, I honestly don't see a future for our unis. It's just more of the same bullshit that Lib/Lab have been doing for decades.
Hopefully clean up the universities and put them back on track educating instead of profiteering.
What’s stopping unis from creating low-cost useless courses to bolster their domestic numbers so they can keep their international students?
40% is a lot. If universities can't function with a 40% cap, they are over reliant on international students or are fake universities.
Great to see the government finally doing something about this. It’s not perfect but it’s a good start and the 40% figure gives them a framework to reduce further if the rental crisis doesn’t improve.

Will hopefully knock out all the dodgy diploma mill colleges as well.

Also it’s disappointing to see Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi (who owns a bunch of investment properties) criticising the government for this. Especially given how many Greens voters are renters who are facing consecutive years of 10%+ rental inflation due to excess demand for rentals.
Whilst it is an issue within the sector, the fact is that universities are an easy target for the government and they are more than happy for people to claim that this tackles the cost of living issue when in reality the biggest contributor to housing issues in Australia is people investing in housing. Not foreign students.
So, free for the remaining 60% (Aussies) right? RIGHT?
Just remove the pathway from student to permanent residence and disallow work while a student. Dont need a cap then, only genuine students would be coming.
Maybe some programs at uni shouldn't be in the domain of university? 

A bachelor of contemporary dance could be run by a specialist college...

National galleries could become accredited to deliver qualifications in arts.

Degrees with a surplus of graduates to  jobs in the sector could lose their commonwealth supported places and courses be shifted to 1 or two unis.
Sorry, dumb question, can they just offer Australian students scholarships to keep the same number of international few paying students?
[deleted]
We're really speed running the destruction of our economy aren't we? Ah well. Creative destruction is supposed to be good for the capitalism.
Do we need a cap on mining companies that export more then 40% of the gas they mine?

Maybe we should have a 60% *floor* on overseas students.  If you can't produce courses good enough to attract foreign students, why should Australian students be subjected to your mediocrity?

You can't whinge about universities no accepting enough Australian students if Australian student numbers are actually capped by the federal government.  We have not had demand based funding since Gillard.
I mean now thats there is a cap, then universities will actually set that as a benchmark.  
Can we please just make tertiary education free already?   
  
How about letting universities run two institutions each, one for foreign one for residents and the foreign one is taxed to pay for the other.   
  
Its already unpaid self improvement, no point putting people into debt.
Centrist my ass. Complete appeasement to the anti-immigration rhetoric of the far right and left. What a fucking racist joke. Take some standard anti-immigrant bullshit from Pauline, and dress it up in the politically correct language of "housing affordability" and "cost of living", and you've got this bullshit.
This is a monumentally stupid decision. Education is one of Australia's top exports, and unlike exporting natural resources which harms our environment, exporting ideas comes at our benefit. Educating large numbers of internation students supports our under-funded universities. They still have an outsised impact for our size and location, and bring a huge amount of value to our country. 

If the government wants to solve the housing crisis, they should come up with actual housing policy (i.e. reducing the strong incentives for investors, building public housing, etc.). Don't hamstring universities instead.
It's less than ten unis with more than 40%. It's a cut on the tallest poppies without killing off the entire crop

The interesting bit will be the fake colleges that are for getting a visa. These would be close to 100%.

These deserve to burn
I can think of a hand full of marine biology universities where this will wipe out 30% of the students.
Not the white immigrant shitting on other immigrant, there is no way.
Hey there! University research doesn’t increase house prices; why should we invest in it?! /s
There is no lost revenue, 40% will now be a benchmark at every university. They will budget against it and put in plans to make it happen.
Bicycle and scooter delivery riders
Tafe jacked up my cert iii to $8000 when it was originally $4000 lol was NOT worth it
Respectfully and Anecdotally, I'm from Newcastle where the local university has spent over $100 million of its own money (plus about the same again from federal and state governments) on property development over the last 10 years. 

I now live in the inner-west of Sydney where Sydney University have spent $250 million of their own money buying a redeveloping sites. 

I understand sustainable funding is important but some of these uni's aren't spending the money they have on real university streams (research and faculty). I'm all for funding universities correctly but there would need to be serious string attached about how they spend it and the way they're able to horde land.
Do you have a source that backs up your claim that they incur a loss for (all) domestic students?  I find this incredibly hard to believe, considering uni costs 20-30 years ago were not even a fraction of what we have today.
Very well said, and accurate
Sounds like a shit business model if you’re ripping good people and still not making money
I know degree fees are regulated but I’m still very curious as to how they can’t be profitable charging a minimum 15k per year on a degree.
Well the point is  that if funding is inadequate  to have all these universities in the market they should be amalgamated into  a self sufficient  sector that caters for the size of the local market. Hell we are small country and we seem to want a Uni in every suburb. It would be cheaper to give uni students free public transport tickets that can get them to one powerful university with prestige. People travel across the world to attend Ivy league universities. Why cant you take a bus  or train to great large university that is properly resourced. 

Country students can be catered for in the many University accommodation hotels that were built for foreign student. How was it that the sector was a self sustaining model in 80's and 90's and most students were  local? To me these universities not having sufficient funds is no different to any business growing too quickly for the available cashflow but they proceeded being greedy knowing full well that they could not fund themselves properly. They knew that successive governments cut funding and they did not address the shortfalls with increased fees and charges like a sensible business, especially for fee paying students. The question also has to be asked why they did not double foreign student fees to allow for their growth. They just sound like  bunch of incompetent entitled business managers who could not run a milk bar their business planning skills are so poor, maybe they need to go back to uni and learn how to run a business!
but they have money to buy REA and pay chancellors millions... the problem is their spending...
You should probably go work for the uni's, they'd love that idea
Another thing they can do is drag out domestic courses and speed up international. This could also mean there’s an incentive to fail domestic students so they have to repeat subjects.
The 40% will be based on 2019 numbers, so no way to manipulate it
> low-cost useless courses

aka arts degrees?   /jk
Sometimes the Greens policy seems totally out of whack with reality. They want more immigration but less use of natural resources. More housing supply but not use CO2 to build them. I remember talking to one of the candidate who was handing out flyers during an election and she seemed so disconnected from reality as to how they planned to “build 100% social housing” for my suburb that I’ve stopped voting for them completely.
International university students make up approx 4% of the rental market, and in suburban areas around major universities the vacancy rate is higher than in large inner city areas. The whole 'it will free up housing' argument is garbage. Some universities now have special use accommodation which is only available to students sitting empty thanks to actions already taken by the government. It's hard to see the international student attack as anything other than an anti-immigration dog whistle.
green is crazy. still want social housing when so many social housing projects did not work at all.
Yeah international students are a very small slice of the rental market. But the Uber economy might be in shambles!
There is [solid research](https://monitor.icef.com/2024/05/new-research-debunks-link-between-australias-rental-housing-crisis-and-international-students/) that international students have no effect on housing prices.
>the biggest contributor to housing issues in Australia is people investing in housing. Not foreign students.

It's both.
What a load of crap. Without investors, most off the plan apartments wouldn't have gone up. That is a fact. Where else would renters live?

We have seen it during Covid when lockdown happened that rents went down in student popular areas like the city and around campuses.
This would certainly tank most universities pretty quickly.

We have something like 35 universities in this country. At least 25 of them are so shite that no international student application would ever be submitted to them again.
Defeats the entire purpose of travelling from your country to ours without the possibility of finding PR from your academics. The assumption that all international students are wealthy is astonishing.
You're getting the downvotes but I sort of agree. I also think there shouldn't be a simplistic pathway from uni student to PR. There should be a system where there is auditable proof that the students properly completed their degree and weren't just given passing grades because they paid up front for it. Universities should be held accountable/punished/fined if it is found that they are allowing international students to get degrees by copy-pasting wikipedia articles as essays. When international students have completed their degrees at the same standard as Australians, then their years in the country should contribute to their PR application.

Nothing wrong with working part time while a student, though. Japan does it - they allow students to work part time 28hrs a week max, with limitations on what industries they are allowed to work in.
No offence but if they can't get PR then they would all go to the UK or USA and actually get a degree by a top University. a degree that will be accepted worldwide.


aus degree don't mean shit when you have one from the UK or US
This will never happen.

Nobody would come here anymore.
they even allowing students to bring in a partner and a family to work
"A bachelor of contemporary dance could be run by a specialist college..."

That used to be the case, with small colleges awarding degrees accredited by unis, but most of those colleges have since merged with universities due to economics/cost cutting reasons.
I know all public universities in WA offer far more scholarships for domestic students than international. There are international scholarships designed to attract new students but not many that continue support throughout their course.
that has no effect on the increased number of international students in each university though
By law, every Aussie is born into water. Those who are able to swim are allowed to grow up in Australia. Those who fail are exiled, never to return unless they can do a 100m butterfly under 1 minute.

I am just joking. The GTE is also a joke. I wonder what is the actual percent of people who actually return after graduation
What are you on about mate? I'd say you've been sniffing gas or something, but we've already exported most of it. 

Funnily enough, if there WAS a proper profits tax on out resource sector, I imagine there would be enough funding for our universities, so they no longer have to depend on foreign student's cash.
Maybe do what unis like Swinburne and RMIT (and some British unis like Manchester) do - which is have specific private campuses abroad in places like Dubai, Malaysia and Singapore to appeal to the Asian market and allow them to study locally.
Yes, it's disgraceful policy debate that conflates G8 universities providing real degrees for money to keep themselves afloat with immigration scam hairdressing schools.
>The interesting bit will be the fake colleges that are for getting a visa. These would be close to 100%.

I suspect they will approach this in a similar fashion to how they rorted the VET FEE-HELP scheme. It will be something like offering incentives (free gift cards, PS5, etc) for domestic students who sign up to some course at some negligible cost per semester. 

I don't understand why the federal government is not simply restricting the visa conditions and pathways, which would be the proper pathway to kill this industry. It screams of politics more than anything.
Yep they all need to be shut down or at least very tightly regulated.
My uni has a massive  bilding just for  them to sit around and "study" it has three cafes in it  while all the classes are on the other side of the  campuses in realy old  bilding not rraly fit for modern use they made a new bilding but I sware it's for what ever classes they take because it only has six floors for classes and all the classes a frst year 
I wonder whether those colleges will start offering scholarships to local students to make up the numbers... what's the simplest cheapest course to deliver?
If that's what you think this is about, then your head is right up your arse.
Of course there is a loss in revenue and budgeting against it will mean removing jobs
Since Australia relies on international students to subsidise research, there will be lost revenue for research.
what course was it?
International student education is Australia’s third biggest export industry.  You have to invest to support this.  I do not see the problem.
Sandstone universities are struggling to get students in domestically since Covid to come to them rather than online-only or flexible options. Australians no longer want to have to move city to do degrees if they can do everything digitally, much like their WFH jobs afterwards. This means large universities with tons of prestige, reputation, services and research are struggling to fund the teaching portion from just teaching.

For example, ANU in 2023 reported [they were $11.3 million below budget for tuition fees, due mainly to lower enrolments of domestic full fee students.](https://services.anu.edu.au/planning-governance/planning-review/2023-anu-financial-results). They made more money in savings accounts for future investment and repairs than they did from actual teaching. 40% of their income was government subsidies.

In 2017 the government froze increased investment based on student levels and the response was to cut to staffing levels by up to 30% at most universities in Australia to avoid impacting profits because all forecasts were based on annual increases.

So we have a situation where private enterprises are being subsidised by taxpayer funds, if we cancel the subsidies Australians suffer. Our global reputation suffers and our ability to compete suffers in 5-10 years. Or we subsidise the industry but the industry asks for more money every year.

If we delete a source of revenue that is twice as profitable to your average Australian, we either need the government to pay for that loss in subsidies, or assume they’ll reduce staffing and services by 50% of their private profits to their expected loss. 

Terrifying idea, but it really comes down to how many universities we want to see go under and how many small businesses, support staff and flow on effects we’re willing to accept to deal with that. Many researchers don’t have experience in working in mining or teaching. They might not be good at nursing or midwifery. So what do they do? Dole? Go back to uni?
>if funding is inadequate to have all these universities in the market they should be amalgamated into a self sufficient sector

Funding is inadequate because that was a choice neoliberal government made over 30 years ago. It's not a crowded market of unis at all. We only have 39 universities total in all of Australia. What's crowded is the market of shitty visa colleges, not unis.

>How was it that the sector was a self sustaining model in 80's and 90's and most students were local? 

It wasn't. It simply had proper funding and was more selective. There was also proper funding for TAFE and other vocational training, so students didn't all need to go to uni to get qualifications. Further, jobs hired people without degrees all the time and instead had on the job training. That doesn't happen anymore outside of apprenticeships. But you can't be an office drone without some sort of qualification.
Im not sure they were self funding previously though?
There were waaaaaay fewer students in the 80s and 90s, numerically and percentage wise. It costs a lot more to fund universities now because there are more students. Also because university pay and conditions are probably some of the best in the workforce.
"Hell we are small country and we seem to want a Uni in every suburb. It would be cheaper to give uni students free public transport tickets that can get them to one powerful university with prestige. People travel across the world to attend Ivy league universities. Why cant you take a bus or train to great large university that is properly resourced."

TBH I think that's the last thing we need. I'm from the UK where due to the well-known bias among employers for Russell Group (particularly Oxbridge, LSE, UCL, Imperial, York, Warwick etc.) grads, students outside of say London are already expected to be "perfect" and get A\*A\*A\*A\* etc. at A-Level and move across the country to stay at expensive halls of residence to study at a uni for the course they want or the "prestige" to get on some grad scheme. What does it mean? More debt, disconnected families etc.
I genuinely don't understand this "joke", I know it's meant to be a piss take of what people view as a "useless" degree, but I would love to have any one of you people who mindlessly repeat it actually lay out what you think an arts degree entails?
... theology ...
They’ve always been a party that don’t care about the “how” when it comes to policy. They’re a bunch of lifelong, career public servants that are content with being contrarian and collecting a paycheque out of it
I've also given up on the greens. They seem very fake with most of their policys contradicting another policy. Their position on any topic seem to be wedge Labor and take their voters.
The greens are a party of trust fund kiddies who's wealthy parents make sure they have housing
> More housing supply

they definitely don't actually want this.
> They want more immigration but less use of natural resources.

Which are not two things that are at opposition once you actually drill down into their policies.

> More housing supply but not use CO2 to build them.

Much the same as this, you can't just talk about policy in an abstract without actually mentioning details and minutiae, which the Greens absolutely do provide.

> I remember talking to one of the candidate who was handing out flyers during an election and she seemed so disconnected from reality as to how they planned to “build 100% social housing” for my suburb that I’ve stopped voting for them completely.

Such as?
It’s simple demand economics. Every less renter = less upward pressure on rents.

4% nationally is huge - especially considering foreign students given their circumstances (the need to secure a rental urgently ahead of semester starting + lack of domestic rental history etc.) are often the marginal demand buyers.
lol the data they used was from a guy called Louis Christopher and his property website. He posted on Twitter they should have asked him to comment and said international students have a huge impact on housing and they misunderstood his data points
Increase the rental availability rate by 4% and rent costs will drop overnight 
lol look who wrote the research paper “the student accom council”
Oh and also the data they used was from 2021 when there were no international students because of Covid. Read it yourself if you don’t believe me
Sounds like the free market at work. The Uni's will have to actually become good at teaching again.
Do you have evidence to back up the counter-assumption?

Home Affairs website provides some statistics about student visas, but not enough (that I could find) to determine how many international students end up with PR, vs how many return to their home countries.
This sub seems convinced that only idiots come here to study from abroad and they all fake their assignments meanwhile real Australian’s who are, by virtue of being born here, much smarter than international students stuffer terribly as a result. It’s certainly not how I remembered my time at uni.
Isnt that the point? Shouldn't universities be about education, not backdoor pathways for immigration?
What I am on about, is that I like having overseas students.

Being a university worker researcher can be a good job.

Australia can, if we choose to focus on it, be a good provider of education.

It is a good thing if people around the region, and around the world have exposure to Australia, and our culture.

If we choose to fund our universities there is plenty of resources, both with or without the current mining revenues.  The total cost to the federal budget of higher education is $11B in 2024.  The cost to the budget of negative gearing and the capital gains tax discount is expected to be $165B over the next decade.
COVID taught us that hairdressers are essential workers /s
Lol my GO8 degree wasn't a real degree at all imo.

We weren't really allowed to fail students as tutors.  
The entire system is a scam ime.
They are going to use 2019 numbers as baseline for 40% so if they already over 40% in the 2019, there is no other way but to cut.
Out of interest, your post had me wondering what you're studying?
Sounds just like the Roundhouse ...
I mean those sorts of study spaces are fantastic to have as a uni student, gives you a place to actively work on your coursework/assessment while on campus and especially with how online most lectures/tutorials are now it gives people a space to attend that still feels like they're actually at uni rather than just sitting in their room at home.

Cafes are usually run by local societies/students and the profits go back into initiatives and groups that benefit students on the whole, plus it's nice sometimes to get a coffee when it's cold and you have 4 hours of lectures to sit through.

Also just going to ignore your constant use of them and othering as that's its own gross thing, just don't understand what your actual complaint is?
Only for unis that are above 40%. Only about ten are currently above 40%. But it sets a precedent. Might drop further as the housing crisis furthers.

It's a stick on the demand side but supply is f'd. We should freeze immigration except for trades, doctors and partners.
Aye, for sure, folks don't understand that Uni's require an enormous amount of space and the supposed "horde'ing" and investment in property development is done to support students across the board, having cheap, accessible accommodation that's in close proximity to the university is a fantastic investment. Really frustrating that people will just point at them spending money and inherently claim it's wasteful without ever showing what it's actually being spent on.
they want to come here because of our ranking, our ranking is dependant on research and quality of talent. The buildings are because administrators like having assets and don't see staff as such.
None of what you posted says they run at a loss for domestic. If anything what you posted says they desperately want more domestic students.... Which means they make a profit from it otherwise they wouldn't bother?
It was also a very different economy. The stagnation of TAFE and the rise of Aussie unis is a response to that.

The services sector (i.e. financial services, tech, law, PR, recruitment, sales) - which either requires or expects degrees from its workers - was much smaller then. Now we have behemoths like the Big 4 banks (notably Commbank) and Macquarie trying to expand and be the next Barclays or Goldman Sachs. The manufacturing sector, which would absorb much of the people leaving TAFE and skilled trades roles, is tiny now and in some areas (like car manufacture) nonexistent in Australia. The huge mining boom that got Aus through the 2000s and the early 2010s and took on so many workers is long gone and will disappear further if China tips into recession. The only thing really keeping skilled trades going is the Housing Boom.
Is funding inadequate though? The campuses are pretty well funded. How are their investments going? How about remuneration for high level staff - is it under control?

Just because they conduct themselves in a neoliberal manner that kills their own golden goose doesn't mean anybody forced them to. Education shouldn't be a sexy or lucrative business - it should be meat and potatoes. They want to be Harvard running an investment hedge fund instead of educating Australians.. screw them, it's a business model that deserves to fail.
We don't need 39 Uni's in Australia. We could do with half that number. We could do with just 8 Uni's, 1 in each state or territory.
You can disagree with God, but most theology degrees are pretty intense with their language, history and general shitton of research requirements. 
But when the "how" is chopping down all the trees and burning all the fossil fuels no other party cares about the "how" either.
> They’re a bunch of lifelong, career public servants that are content with being contrarian and collecting a paycheque out of it

This is 100% just the ALP and LNP, the Greens absolutely do care about the how, you can straight up read their policy and it well tell you as much.
They cannot exert any power without gaining seats. Assuming all of those seats must be cracked off Labor disregards other restless electorates held by independents or (gasp) the LNP.
Ayyy, there's the predictable comment from the average rusted on Labor voter, who will then turn around and pretend that the ALP and LNP candidates are somehow "battlers" who didn't ride through life with a silver spoon in their mouth.
They want it, they just don't want it near them.
If student make up 4% of the market, then if vacancy rates are around 1%, dropping the student numbers by 25% DOUBLES the vacancy rate.
Sure - let's ignore the effect on the rest of the economy. For example, international students accounted for *half* of all of 2023's [economic growth in Australia](https://www.afr.com/policy/economy/foreign-students-are-saving-the-economy-20240308-p5fasz). Would you like unemployement with your slightly cheaper rent?
Just please ignore the economy crashing once they go as they account for something like half of our economic growth - https://www.afr.com/policy/economy/foreign-students-are-saving-the-economy-20240308-p5fasz

But nah, I'm sure that it wouldn't have averse effects on rental prices, because it's "simply" supply and demand after all, there's no other factors that work into it.
https://go8.edu.au/policy-brief-international-students-and-housing-and-other-cost-of-living-pressures

Wow, literal ad-hominem, their data is valid and there's other studies like the one above linked within the report.
> Data show that vacancies and increasing rental costs were a trend well before international students returned to Australia after the COVID-19 pandemic

Yeah no shit, they used before -and- after data to perform a comparative analysis, did you even read it? They studied from 2019-2023 to show that overall international students had very little impact upon rental prices, especially as they aren't generally staying in the kind of residences that are contributing to rental issues, jfc.
Except they won’t.

They’ll just have to close, or be funded by our tax dollars.

Options that equate to political  suicide for any party.
From recollection around 2 in 10 international students ends up a permanent resident. I don’t have the report available so I’m happy to be corrected if I misremembered.
Personally out of the 500 international students I’ve mingled/networked with, I reckon only 3 of them gained PR purely because a) they were incredibly valuable to the company and b) legally needed them to have PR in their company. Otherwise they would’ve still been paid visa rates for their skill level.

International students are nothing to Australian companies but a slightly more expensive offshore team.
Co-signed. Having actually spent many years teaching these students, a lot of the international ones *are* pretty bad, but our domestic ones aren't really any better. Even the domestic ones coming in from selective high schools with high-90s ATARs are often pretty disappointing.
No they're coming here to take your jobs and houses
That's because this sub is infested with right wing astroturfers.
This isn't about education though, it's about visas.
Yeah but I an IT grunt was also deemed an essential worker. And as I have said countless times, I am the least important or essential person in the room, any room, No matter who is in the room.
Probably not English
Saw NOFX at the Roundhouse back in the 90’s. Good times.
the new building - just for coffee and food  most students dont use the thing no classes no lecture halls its extreamly big

building in the CBD -lol frst semester only

building at the end of the train line - lol  not for students

the old building - is not wheelchair friendly  hour away from the CBD even the train needs a suttle  buss  and then walk thew the new building impossible to navigate to get to and extremely old

the place is built to flese you into thinking the new buildings has all the classes
Yes we need more trades the local trades are shit and way overpaid. We need to bring at least 100k tilers, carpenters, electricians etc. A lot of my mates don’t know they add from their elbow yet they’re making $150k plus in their trades
Hmm.  Infrastructure that doesn’t get used is a dead weight. If they are treating staff poorly then they will have high turnover rates, but I have not seen any data that would support that.
Yeah, most large universities would bend over to accept domestic full-fee paying Australians over international students paying double in cash upfront, but that’s not what’s happening in Australia.

Less Australians are paying full fee for a whole bunch of degrees, more are asking for hecs/help subsidies. That means on average, some degrees are worth more objectively than other degrees and some students are objectively worth more than other students.

It’s not a zero sum game, The issue isn’t whether they profit, it’s about return on investment and where you put your money to maximise return. 

To be clear, if you told your boss that you were going to purposefully tank profits by chasing customers that would pay $10 a coffee rather than customers that will pay $20 for the same coffee, how long would you stay in your role before replaced by someone willing to chase $20 customers? You might be making a profit, but that’s not how you maximise return.

“Return on investment” degrees and subsidy degrees. Ask a vice chancellor to reduce expected income, they will ask their department heads to cut less profitable courses, condense courses and reduce staffing proportionally. Degree choice goes down. You get more “bachelor of business” and less “bachelor of sports medicine”. “Bachelor of early childhood education” gets turned into a major of “bachelor of teaching/education”.

Some people genuinely want this because they don’t like or believe in specialisation outside of “group of 8” universities and believe there should be technical colleges like what RMIT and QUT were, where it’s like a superTAFE but non research. Then if you want to do research you go to a real university.

The Return on Investment degrees are Business, science, engineering, law, medicine. 

The ones that will get decimated if unis only chase domestic students are performing arts, nursing, midwifery, teaching, early childhood education, hospitality or niche degrees.

That will be the monkey’s paw answer. Cut services and investment rather than cut profits due to loss of income from international student revenue.

Now this isn’t a threat, this is knowing the group of 8 vice chancellors and what they HAVE DONE REPEATEDLY every fucking time international students have been impacted. Complain number of unis need to drop, complain that technical colleges were fine. Complain that their uni should survive but all others should perish. That degree choice will need to drop. That Australians are demanding they do this.

Government is just gonna do whatever. The for profit enterprises have them by the balls and the teachers union is insanely powerful. Murdoch would love to shit on Labor killing the teaching and education industry.
Yeah from everything I read the lecturers and people paid to mark work get paid crap.

The money goes to the admin side of house with massive pay packets for the deans and inflated admin staff. There should be pay caps for any not for profit organisation.
...they were literally forced to.  The liberal government gave them funding cuts 5 times in 9 years, as well as denying them adequate COVID support.  


If you spend a decade telling a service to act like a business, they will, and they'll lower the quality of the product to the minimum standard.
Couldn't be further from the truth for most universities though. Most of the middle sized ones (think Griffith, Newcastle, Wollongong, La Trobe, etc.) aren't exactly building giant new facilities. Many of them are regional universities addressing regional needs, and don't exactly have a lot of operating margin. 

These are also critical universities to the communities - let them fail and students are forced to go to capital cities, which in turn hurts the regional economies with shortages of labour for sectors like retail and in the longer term population decline as students that relocate to study often don't return until later in their careers, if at all. There needs to be more public funding if the international pool isn't available to these institutions.
> Just because they conduct themselves in a neoliberal manner that kills their own golden goose doesn't mean anybody forced them to. 

they were absolutely forced to be the Howard government champ.

read some history

https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media%2Fpressrel%2FG9NG6%22;src1=sm1
Doing that would mean that nearly 3/4 of all uni students don't get access to the education. That can only work in an economic climate that hasn't built up getting a degree at the minimum entry requirement. And no not of all those students can just pick up trades instead, there are certainly not enough apprenticeships to do so. Also Victoria, Queensland and NSW have multiple high class Universities. If we are going to pick one do we just shut down Monash, UNSW, or Griffith?

The problem is governments don't want to actually fund these institutions, at times it feels like a number of politicians are actively opposed to the idea of higher education. The sector will probably fix itself if we stop forcing them to keep looking for ways to fund themselves, without international students the entire sector collapses. We can blame the Unis as much as we want, but they have been getting funding cut for ages now so what exactly do we expect them to do? Like the majority of research in the STEM space alone is expensive to an insane degree though just the equipment. It's not cheap to do the kinds of research that put a lot of Australian Unis into the positions they get within international rankings. Yes there is a problem of poor spending, but they are probably seeing things like building as a real estate investment because we keep forcing these places to operate like a for-profit corporation despite education being a rather unprofitable enterprise in the short term.
Even ignoring how much of the country that would instantly price out, you'd essentially need to create an entire city just to support the singular university assuming it were to absorb all the students from all the institutions within the state. There's an estimated 375k uni students in NSW, have fun designing anywhere that can handle that many people traveling to and from it each and every single day, all with wildly different schedules and timetables.

Travel to one of the big uni's as it is can already be a nightmare in peak times, if you suddenly multiplied their populace by 4 you're just asking for collapse.
Huge presumption. First let's allow disagreement with the belief that  any gods exist at all.
“They’re just as bad as the rest of them” isn’t a great defence
That’s a false dilemma though, nobody is for cutting down all the trees and burning all the fossil fuels. 

Labor’s policy is pretty clear on 82% renewable energy by 2030 and net zero by 2050. They realistically accept that gas needs to stay in the short-medium term for this to happen.

The greens say they’ll do it all faster and better. Huge energy price increases will be paid for by taxing the energy companies whose products they also promise to ban. It’s very much a “we’ll build a wall and Mexico will pay for it” mentality, and like Trumps rhetoric it works for their base but is not based in reality.
It’s actually the vast majority of politicians globally, including most, if not all, of the Australian Greens. The ALP and LNP suck, but our current best option is Labor by a country mile.
The Greens are a garbage party who would be terrible economic managers and rely on spouting feel-good policy that naive uni students think is groundbreaking, but don’t actually have the wherewithal to implement any of it. They will thankfully never gain any significant ground because a good portion of the country aren’t dumb enough to vote for them, and the other significant portion of the country are too dumb and will just keep voting LNP.
They should be putting forward priorities and policy's they would want to chase after the next election.

All I know from them after the next election recognition of Palestine is a main priority followed by housing.
Lol. Fuck the major parties that have destroyed Australia for the young.


https://www.sustainableaustralia.org.au/
they want neither inner city densification nor greenfields.
You need to run me through that math mate
Nice pivot
Mate if you think 750,000 extra people that HAVE to live in a house has little impact on how many free houses there are available to rent then I really don’t know what to tell you.
And our women. Don’t forget about the women
Farkin' dole bludgers stealin' our jobs.
Really? To me it seems like it’s an echo chamber for labor chills half the time
I don't have a problem with reducing permanent visa's for graduates.

That is different from capping the number of full fee paying students.
I'm an I.T. guy who works for a ticket-selling company. I could barely get a day off during the pandemic! The clients were fucking rabid given they had NO EVENTS AND NO SALES. They had a lot of fucking spare time to hassle me.

Honestly, one of the saddest bits was "can you get the mass refund feature going so Bob can do that this week because then we're gonna sack him."

Poor Bob. JobKeeper saved his arse.
I believe that what you said, is the * footnote on the definition of 'essential workers'
I remember [The Atlantics](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qmMeqid_fmU) being on. Good times.
If the top 8 industry players were treating staff poorly there would be high turnover? Where are they supposed to go?
No one forced them into criminality like wage theft. The fish and chip shop down the road doesn't get that option and neither should they.
Indeed. It's the Go8 and some tech unis like UTS that are aggressively expanding and building new facilities to attract the international students and boost themselves up international league tables. The regional unis do take on international students but are really there to service their local students, many of whom study part time or in collaboration with work. They are also sometimes the largest employers in their communities.
Orrr.. disregard the educational sector as a source of profit. Or students as a source of cheap labour - which is actually quite perverse.

The cost of educating people has never been cheaper - and even back in my day it was pretty cheap anyway.. 1 lecturer in front of 200 students where it could be done completely digitally today, with very little loss in quality. That was the case for the first 2 years of a 3 year degree. Where have the savings of modern technology gone? Certainly not into the quality of education.
"Champ"

Nobody is responsible for criminality but themselves. If they can't pay the correct wage wind up the business.
If Santos and Woodside have not planned for transitioning to a gas-free future then they deserve eventual oblivion.
> All I know from them after the next election recognition of Palestine is a main priority followed by housing.

That says far more about you and where you get your information than it does them tbh.
Not the person you're replying to but based on the rates they said, of 100 houses- 1 would be vacant and 4 would be rented by international students. If you reduce the international 4 (by 25%) to 3 then there is an extra 1 available. Which means 2 out of 100 are vacant. 2 is double 1.
> To me it seems like it’s an echo chamber for labor chills half the time

Yes, right wing astroturfers.
IT is never essential.
Well, you’re certainly older than I.
because the local fish and chip shop has totally the same importance for Australia's future prosperity and strategic interests.

Christ what an incredibly embarrassing comparison to make. Just unhinged
> here have the savings of modern technology gone? Certainly not into the quality of education.

what service industry can you point to whose costs have come down considerably over the past 20 years as a result of technology?
And everyone else who needs to use electricity? Where will it come from? We’re going full steam ahead to renewables and don’t look like making our 2030 targets.
It means either their message doesn't cut through or I'm a voter they don't want or expect, so they don't reach me.

I get news from all different sources and generally don't rely on one specific news site or medium.
I think for this mode of analysis to work you'd need to look at how the housing is used. I don't believe it's the same across all demographics
this is assuming they actually live in "houses" do the numbers again by bedrooms or square meters and it won't be very impressive esp if you compare to elderly ladies living alone in family houses.
I’m confused I thought labor was a left-ish party lol
Indubitably. But I think we can agree live music rocks.
It does actually, it pays people a fair wage and gives me fish and chips

The G8 already get to patent the inventions of all their students for free.. how can't they make a living out of that?
Literally everyone that no longer has to train their employees to handle cash might be a good example. For instance the university library I used to work at that got rid of the service desk and made everyone stand around with "need help?" shirts on - even the shelvers who were not paid to provide help.
In particular there is a lot of student-specific housing that isn't actually accessible to non-students.
I'm not the person who made the claim, I was just explaining the maths behind it.
Absolutely!
> The G8 already get to patent the inventions of all their students for free

how many patents do you think undergraduate students are producing champ?

my lord, you clearly have zero idea about the higher education sector. 

It's actually quite funny

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect
you didn't answer the question champ.

here, try again:

what service industry can you point to whose costs have come down considerably over the past 20 years as a result of technology?
> iterally everyone that no longer has to train their employees to handle cash might be a good example

so 10 mins of training?
Not all students rent student accommodation. If there is less demand for student accommodation and prices come down, student who don't live in student accommodation will move to closer student accommodation, freeing up precious housing stock for others
and i am adding more to the formula. if a student shares a bedroom with 1/2 other students in a crappy apartment or student accommodation and a pensioner lives alone in a massive 4 bedroom family house explain the maths on that.
Maybe change your name to insulting, belittling guava. No answer would satisfy you, and I'm not going to craft an answer to your ever anal demands. If you can't think of any industries that have come down in cost - or been eliminated entirely - due to technology perhaps you need some higher, or even secondary, education.
10 mins of training lol managing physical cash accounts even in a regular shop is substantial overhead. Also considering "that's the job" pretty much - paying fines was a big part of being the desk at a library, now done entirely online. They were in the process of getting rid of the books entirely and roboticising the library at that point - probably accomplished by now in most of the G8 unis.

Eliminating an entire unionised workforce for which specific awards exist is quite the dollar saver. Doesn't improve the quality of education though, if you want to browse a book or a topic you need to navigate various full text databases online. Want to browse an art journal for ideas? Better bring your laptop. Kinda kills serendipitous discovery or person to person recommendations, especially in specialized libraries like fine arts. You may as well not go on campus at all.
