
Sounds great until...

> The program will be open to Australian citizens who meet a set of requirements on both the Australian and US sides. 

> Applicants will be subject to a Nationally Coordinated Criminal History Check from the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission.

then

> The US charges a non-refundable fee of $US100 ($154) per Global Entry application. If approved, it lasts for five years.

> Australia will also charge applicants for the cost of processing background checks.

Ok if you are frequently traveling to the US but bloody expensive if you want to jump the 30 min to an hour wait in the immigration queue  to get your passport stamped the old fashioned way.
Considering it's about the price of "upgrading" to an exit row. Worth it.

Considering it's about 10 ESTA. Rip off. (Does it replace the ESTA?)

Depends how much you hate queuing after a long flight (I've been stuck in some crazy long queues)
My goal in Life is to get an [APEC card](https://www.apec.org/groups/committee-on-trade-and-investment/business-mobility-group/abtc)
Babe I'll meet you at the hotel tomorrow, I didn't subscribe to border patrol premium so I have to wait in the que. 


 What a shit timeline were in.
fortunately the right sort of people will be able to do this without any fees - but why? ar they expecting to fail horribly and th trial people will get stuck in limbo?
Incoming arrival checks by the US seem a bit farcical when you consider how porous their southern border can be. But, hey, good thing you've now got my fingerprints on file guys...
This is how I see it, Australia has one of the best passports in the world, and we can travel almost anywhere with little fuss. That includes Europe most of Asia and our great mates over the Tasmin. I've been in Japan the last week and travelled around Europe for a month with zero hassles.  

So why the fuck would I want to go to a country that charges me an entrance fee plus invasive background checks?

Just a list of the countries I've popped into so far without a visa.  

New Zealand 
The UK - England, Scotland 
France 
Amsterdam 
Japan 

You want the "America" experience, Japan has a universal theme park, Disneyland, and tons of little amusement parks dotted everywhere. 

Plus, you don't have some jerk screaming at you at the drop of a hat or pointing a gun in your face. 

So what's my incentive?
Also get ready for that $154 fee to be $500+ here if its anything like our absolutely insane passport and licensing fees compared to every othet country on earth.
So people from States who dont retire old historic criminal records will be rejected because they have minor criminal  records for things like drug possession and will be flagged like  International terrorists. 

Its a great way to transfer the criminal database and database of the Australia population to the USA with no privacy controls. Meaning that if you get pulled over in the USA  your whole history will be available to vicious cops in the USA. People don't sometimes think about the implications. 

Meanwhile countries South of their border dont cooperate by handing over private information in a wholesale manner, their citizens, criminals and terrorists are freely crossing their border. 

You would have thought that the status of Australia as a ally would give Australians  condition free travel to the USA like Canadian citizens. Here again we get treated like second class   allies.  Meanwhile our neighbours in Asia who are not our allies let us enter their countries because they know we are good people not looking for trouble who enjoy their culture.

Amazing how we are one of the best Ally's of the US and they still treat us like a enemy combatant country at the low levels.
ESTAs will still be required (at least they were when I was a Canadian permanent resident and had the Canadian/USA version of Global Entry called “Nexus”)
Any responses? Has it not been a porous border? Is there really a reason why the US needs my prints but the UK/China/France anywhere else does not? 
"Special mates contract rates"
Isn't it up to each country to determine if they want to let people in with criminal convictions? Doesn't Australia also refuse entry to people who have said convictions?
Canadian citizens with criminal records gets refused to travel to the US and vice versa
Eh, I was waiting for a visa at the Canadian consulate in Seattle when the American next to me was denied because he had a DUI. That seems like a pretty legit reason to me.
Australia doesn't allow any country, besides NZ, to enter without having a visa or an ETA, including the US. The US is just asking Australians to do the exact same thing we expect them to do when traveling to Australia.

Strange you think Australia should have special treatment when they don't reciprocate. We shouldn't even be getting visa free travel to Europe since we require their citizens to get an eVisa or ETA to travel here.

Also, if you don't want to share your criminal history, don't apply for the program, or even better, don't go to a country where you feel like you will be treated like a criminal. Also, the countries to the south all [require a visa to enter the US] (https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/19/Visa_policy_of_the_USA.svg), unlike Australia which only needs an ESTA.
Thanks. Always spelling it wrong
You're wrong. The US, UK, Canada, NZ and Australia are all part of the Five Eyes Alliance. All will collect your biometrics (fingerprint and face scan) and check with the other countries' immigration databases for violators and passport fraud etc. Your own country of citizenship will not release information on you.
[deleted]
No shit. Just commenting on my perception that their airport and immigration security contains a lot of theatre considering the stuff that happens there, e.g. people somehow boarding planes with guns and/or ammo in their carry-on. Anyway, it's nice to be treated so well when visiting a country that's a close ally. 
