 

Please use Trip.com or Skycanner only to get cheap booking prices, and book your flights directly through the airline. Most of you may know this, but this is for those who don't, like myself, who were affected by them.

I booked an Air Asia flight and through Trip.com because it was cheaper and I did not have to book 4 tickets to separately/do connections as they are stand alone. They issued me the wrong ticket through their system. For a month and a half they promised to help with the change, but at couple weeks later, they told me I had to contact Air Asia, and they could not help at all. Air Asia was kind enough to give me the flight I originally wanted, but then trip.co m just had to accept the change but they could not understand me nor the air line contacting them and they dragged it till 3 days away and price was the same as booking a whole new ticket since it was at the last minute.

Trip.com's customer service gives generic call center replies but never actually sends a message or email to the airlines they deal with. They just make you go around in circles.

Learned from my mistakes but you guys if you did not know learn through mine and not lose out on money like me.  Booking directly through the airline is cheaper, which I knew, but I chose Trip.com for convenience. Lesson learned.
I found that going straight to the airline is better for ticket problems, the issue is that third party platforms book your flight for you, but they don't really manage it because airlines don't send the data back to the platform when bookings change. 

Actually, I had a pretty good experience with [trip.com](http://trip.com) when travelling because I had a flight that was delayed and it would have meant that my connecting flight would be missed. The app told me about the delay as soon as it happened (a very dynamic weather situation had developed) and I was approached by a [trip.com](http://trip.com) representative to solve the problem a short while later. this all happened quite late at night and we were flying first thing in the morning, so had already called the airline after the alert and rebooked for a better flight. The point is without the app to send alerts, I would have been blissfully unaware that my flights were gone, and would be stuck overseas instead of Aus.

Just be aware I think, there are pros and cons to third party apps, but I found the alerts and ease of looking up all your bookings on a single app really useful. It is a booking app in the end, not a travel agent.
I agree, however I never had issues with reputable third party websites like Expedia for example. If the third party website has decent customer support it’s OK.
Avoid mytrip.com at all costs.
 Another 3rd party off sky scanner. Airline cancelled my flight and these jerks never refunded me for it. Such shitty service.
Haven’t gone near any of those third party fuckers since Expedia decided to deduct the ticket price then deduct it again a second time as a “hold” incase the original payment failed… $4500 of available funds removed from my account via a debit card in two $2250 payments. 

I argued with them on the phone for hours before they finally issued me with a letter to send to the bank to release the “hold” $2250.

So angry. Never again.
