
Can we get that in a multi?
Says something about the political landscape that I didn't immediately realise this was satire. Politics is such a joke.
The gambling industry is almost as despicable as the cigarette industry, however one has been tamed into a mere moneymaking scheme for the Feds, while the other continues to roam freely.
Gambling culture in this country is a cancer. That was one of the biggest cultural shocks I experienced when moving to Australia.
65% of the time...
Chef's kiss for the headline.
CASH OUT
Free online support for anyone affected by gambling.

Available 24/7 across Australia.

[Gambling Help Online on 1800 858 858](https://www.gamblinghelponline.org.au/)
RortsBet
Does he want his reforms to work ?
too close to the bone, this one caught me
In response, Australian voters will kick him out at the next election without considering who they're voting in.
Still not as under the thumb of the gambling lobby as the NSW coalition
Each Way Albo is fucking dynamite
It's been a long time since I've been so disappointed in a PM, I just can't see a better option..
Look guys, I need to show the voters something on this and, frankly, you need to fly under the RADAR a bit to avoid and real action. How about we tone down the advertising as an idea?
What if we really did open up markets for chances of political delivery.
When the gambling industry fund you the gambling industry own you
Honestly didn't realise this was satire until it was too late, that's a great headline.
Well, he is under the thumb of gambling, and Butler is under the thumb of big tobacco.
Another 8 fingers to go with other pollies.
They're both hand jobs waiting to happen.
Foxtel depends heavily on gambling money to make up for the decline in advertising revenue so banning gambling ads would likely mean the death of Foxtel. The AFL depends on Foxtel for a big chunk of its revenue so Albanese is faced with a heavy decision. I reckon 4-1 is a way too optimistic and I'd put the odds at 100-1.
Is bro gambling his reform
I'm so done with to 2 Party system.
I like the $28 multi for “credible gambling reform and Albo showing a spine”
And if your team is down by 1 point at half time, you get your money back.
When kids these days are quoting the betting odds when talking about sports matches you know the gambling lobby has fully intertwined itself with this country’s culture.
When you think about the last 3 decades of governance by whatever political party. Everyone of their policies  and governance policy agendas that was supposed to be well thought out, best practice and sensible compromise has been proven to be utter failure. 

The crooks  and corporations always win with the great big joke thats played on public as a legislative window dressing exercise. Here we go again , billions in social damage and they come up with this lame  set of reforms that in 10 years time will  be proven to be a failure whole vulnerable people lose billions. A joke it is indeed. Its all there  on the smug expressions and smirks "fooled them".
Somewhat of an indictment on you though if you didn't immediately see the joke.
Why do you think gambling isn’t a money making scheme for the feds?
[And Albanese is the...What cures cancer?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ca3ROzIICB8)
“Is this just for show” is currently paying $1.02
I think there a social media ban proposed so that's a ggod step in the right direction
It's not new. The pigeon brains over at Sky News coined it before the last election.

https://www.betootaadvocate.com/uncategorized/paul-murray-panics-after-realising-each-way-albo-implies-opposition-leader-is-still-a-safer-bet/
Have they considered offering a product that's appealing and profitable?
I’d take your money.
Albo already sold his spine to the resource sector.
-Imagine what you could be buying instead..
Gambling has been a part of our culture for a LONG time*, yes it's gotten worse in the last 20 years but it is not a new thing.

*2-up on Anzac day, a public holiday for a horse race
I have refused to watch any sporting ad and in this obvious crisis which is actually a global recession the last thing you want to do is to waste money on that shit
I perform in a bar in a casino most weeks and it's disturbing how many groups of 18 year old boys I see coming in to hit the pokies and the tables.  I can't imagine ever having wanted to go somewhere like that at that age.
Because the gambling lobby is too powerful to let that happen. Although, I have faith that eventually it will be, just like cigarettes. When, I don't know.
They're both money making schemes, that was the point. The other part of it was saying that *despite* them making money from tobacco, they still *massively* reduced their right to advertise and operate in view of children across society. 

How many ads for cigarettes do you see when watching the footy?
Racing was the only sport allowed during Covid imagine all the degenerates on Sportsbet, surely the kickbacks are to good
put me down for $5 lol
Betstop is the best thing they’ve done towards gambling control pretty easy to implement since we are in a digital age however pokies is so accessible it’s disgusting.

Some dude at the local TAB dropped 20k on an nrl game
The issue is we don't need a step when we could have it done immediately. We have a public who wants them banned, a senate crossbench who want them banned, and the only thing stopping it happening is the Labor party.
Online advertising ban is a terrible idea, it will just lead to a duopoly which is never good for consumers.

Small new bookmakers will have zero avenues that they can advertise if online gambling is banned and the only people with enough money to bid on the two gambling ads per hour are Sportsbet, TAB or Ladbrokes.

At least online advertising can be age gated and users can tell the algorithm that don’t want to see those types of ads if they don’t like them. 

By allowing tv advertisement you will still have people under 18 being exposed to gambling ads.
Haha I must have missed that one. Definitely taken on a new life with the current gambling nonsense tho
There's not much which can compete with gambling revenue.
He has a spine???
Was heavily suppressed at times, leading to SP bookies, fantan parlours and backroom baccarat proliferating before shoppingstrip TAB and casinos arrived so governments could take their cut.

I think WA strikes the right balance for scratching the itch but online betting and therefore its advertising should be kicked right out.
Melbourne Cup can piss right off, but allowing one day a year to play 2-Up rather than banning it outright wasn't a bad call. Prohibition clearly doesn't work, but neither does just letting the bastards run rampant.
The fact that you'll be ostracized in near every workplace if you don't opt into the lotto pool, or that you're treated like a weirdo if you say you don't want scratchies for your birthday and the like. Gambling is a foundational part of Australian culture, people are just so desensitized to how normalized it really is.
It's gotten more than worse, way worse.
It's actually crazy. 3/4 of the pubs in NSW and Qld are owned and operated by colesworth because the government takes less tax from those two states.

The only reason they dont operate in Vic is because the Tax is something like 55% of every dollar. 

And I don't think people really understand the scale that goes through not just the pokies, but the horses and dogs. It's absolutely insane.
I think you misunderstand how much gambling companies are taxed.
We do need a stepped approach though. A complete ban on social media and digital platforms is massive and limiting gambling ads to 2 per hour and not within 1 hour either side of sport massively reduces the reach and effectiveness of the ads. Then the next change is only small and would be reducing them to one ad per hour or no ads until after 10pm.

The cynic in me thinks that this is about keeping News Corp and 9 somewhat onside. A complete ban pits the media fully against Labor 6 months out from an election.
> users can tell the algorithm that don’t want to see those types of ads if they don’t like them

What delightful naivete. What is it you expect will happen at that point?
*had
At least it went to the government, that way you couldn't be sure the money wasn't simply trickling into one cunts panama accounts. Now it's a 4-1 certainty
Think it’s something like the average Aussie spends 1000$ on the punt a year.
So your reasoning is that this is better for Labor, gotcha
Google, Meta, Tik Tok, Snapchat etc all want conversions on the ads they show because that gets them more money. If their users aren’t engaging and converting on specific ads they’re not going to keep showing you those ads. It’s pretty basic stuff.
Are you insinuating it's odds-on that online operators are gaming the system? 

Shocking.  Shocking.  NT govt continues to disappoint.
I don't doubt it. But you also have to add the people that win and then put it all back through.

I'm all for a cheeky punt sometimes, but I know that the $20 I put in is gone through moment it comes out of the atm. Some people cannot do that.
I feel like this is highly skewed by people with addictions putting way too much in.

I don't know a single person that would put more than like $100 for anything. Everyone will buy a lotto ticket but and maybe $50 on the horses, but thats it. So for the average to be 1000 just shows how bad those few are
So you'd prefer a Liberal government?
But what users will engage with and what users actually tell you they want to see are very different things. Someone telling you they don't want to see gambling ads might be an addict and as a result be \*very\* responsive to those ads. The gambling companies want to keep their ads in as many faces as possible and will continue to pay to do so, to normalise it and keep it present in people's minds. The tech companies only give a shit as long as the money keeps flowing and they can't actually be caught doing anything illegal (and even then...)

So they will happily keep gambling advertising in people's faces, regardless of expressed preference, just as they will happily keep pushing misogynistic shite in my face to try to get me 'engaged', regardless of how many times I tell them it's offensive, irrelevant or outright report it. They aren't listening to the user. They're listening to their real customers, the gambling advertisers, and the gambling advertisers don't give the first shit what you want to see.

Opt-outs without the force of law never work (see "Do Not Track" and other well meaning but useless measures), and they don't even give you opt-outs, just a few ways to report you don't want to see specific ads or advertisers, which doesn't really achieve much as advertisers can and do change names and work under many different account identities.

And even if all of that did work, which it really does not, what the general public wants is to stop gambling advertising to susceptible people, people who are unlikely to take any steps to try to stop this stuff appearing on their feeds anyway, people who are not discerning about it.

Nobody wants to enable small, new bookmakers. We'd like them all to fuck off please.
> I feel like this is highly skewed by people with addictions putting way too much in.

It is; that's kind of the point of that stat. 

I believe it's more accurate to say the average Aussie *loses* $1000 on the punt a year. 

When you take into account all the people that just don't bet at all (or maybe a cheeky $10 on the Melbourne Cup) and the few that actually win money it highlights just how predatory it is and how much gambling has invaded our culture.
Most certainly. It just highlights the absurdity at which many of those who gamble do so.
No. But you have done a great job of demonstrating the cowardice of Labor and its supporters
No, that's the beauty of our electoral system. We don't have to have majority government of any party. We have more than two choices. If you only can process two, maybe move to the US or UK.
So just to get this right, we should spend the rest of our lives accepting half measures? You don't think that the Labor party is aware of people like you and your goofy belief and absolutely abuses the fuck out of it?

We just get to live in a world where our choices are "will fuck everything up" and "will fuck everything up slightly slower, but will constantly tell you that you should be grateful and you should accept what little they give us because at least they aren't the other guy and expecting more will turn them into the other guy", you seriously can't see how that's the -exact- logic that abusers use to trap their victims?
> or maybe a cheeky $10 on the Melbourne Cup

Why are you trying to dress gambling up in this comment with the "cheeky" addition? Really seems weird to try and play it off as some harmless fun, to then immediately talk about predatory gambling is and how deeply it's "invaded"(it was there from the start) our culture.
So your solution is for Labor to chuck a tantrum and give the next election to the LNP to reverse any progress? Do we really want a repeat of the 2010s?
Nothing like waxing lyrical about the highly improbable but technically possible idea of our electoral system electing a greens or coalition of independents to show how detached from reality you are
How is a complete ban on gambling ads on social media and digital platforms a half measure?

The only progress we make is incremental compounding progress. A 2024 ban online with heavy restrictions on TV becomes a full and total ban in 2028 because it's a much smaller step at that stage. 

The other question is, is this the hill you want the government to die on? There is an election coming up and we have a cost of living crisis and housing crisis, do you really think the government should be declaring war on News Corp, 9, and 7 so they can reduce gambling TV ads from 2 per hour and not one hour either side of sport to 0 per hour? Is that small change worth it?
Yes mate, i'm clearly trying to play off gambling as harmless fun by saying:

> highlights just how predatory it is and how much gambling has invaded our culture.

Jog on and try and pick a random internet beef out of nothing with another stranger. Don't make it a career to get offended by things you've made up in your head.

> (it was there from the start)

Gambling in one way or another is essentially in every culture across the globe but, Australia is the gambling capital of the world and it hasn't *always been* like you're trying to imply, it has grown and evolved into the infection that it is now. That's what I'm implying. Australians haven't been losing 24b a year (or the equivalent when accounting for inflation) since federation in 1901.
[removed]
There are more options besides "majority Labor government" and "majority Liberal government". 

Responding with "sO yOu'D pReFeR tHe LIBS!" when someone criticises the Labor government is peak Labor posting and completely disingenuous.
[removed]
Labor fans will outright endorse straight up abuse tactics, then genuinely wonder why their party are bleeding votes and interest all over the place.
There really aren't more options than that. Maybe you get a minority Labor government with the Greens but you'd be silly to think it'll end any differently to the last time.

>Responding with "sO yOu'D pReFeR tHe LIBS!" when someone criticises the Labor government is peak Labor posting and completely disingenuous.

No, what's disingenuous is ignoring reality for bullshit political point scoring. Most of the progress this country has made has been under a Labor government making continuous, incremental changes that compound. 

Ignoring political reality, making a big change and having it immediately repealed while conservatives get a decade to run the country achieves nothing. Look at this policy for example, they are completely banning gambling ads on social media and digital platforms and massively restricting it on FTA. This is actually a massive change and hugely beneficial. If they know they can get this through, why jeopardise it and everything else they're doing to by decreasing the limits from 2 per hour to 0?
