
Good. Growth is dead here. We’ve been in per-capita recession for a while. Raising rates to slow the economy further would be pretty stupid.

Beyond that, the causes of inflation are essentials - food, fuel and housing. These are not things that people can cut back on.
A raise may not be the best option - it would cause the dollar to raise against the USD for a start.

While inflation is too high, it's not that far outside the band.  So to me it makes sense to sit and wait for another 6 weeks and see what happens in the meantime.

There's also the stock market issues in the US, and talk of a possible recession there.
 The only reason we haven’t seen an increase in rates is because the US is on the verge of recession
Good!
Data says "Yes", vibez say "No."


The vibez have it.
Hmmm I would have thought they'd raise it by a small number noting the still high inflation numbers.
Translation: "We admit Inflation is gonna take longer to go down because we are too afraid to raise rates, but getting down inflation is still totes our highest priority but wont do anything about it"

The delulus
pathetic..
This is what has been driving me crazy. I know they only have one lever to pull but it seems stupid to keep relying on it when its essential items that are the main contributors. I dont want to pay excessive amounts for bills and groceries and fuel, but im not really sure what the alternative is.
Time for the stagflation partyyyyy! Kicking off early with corporate greed but climate change is gonna headline this gig.
Sorry I don't understand your first point. As a country that largely imports everything a stronger AUD would reduce inflation for many of our goods...
Data says raising the interest rates doesn't do shit to reduce spending when all the rich people already own their houses
Share market is going through the floor in the US. Possible recession imminent over there. ASX recovered a bit today but it's very much a wait and see situation.
And if they did raise rates everyone else would be up in arms because they'd be trying to cause a recession...

Can't please everyone
>but im not really sure what the alternative is.

We need reforms from the government, that is the only alternative cause as you said the RBA only has two levers to pull.
Housing costs are going up causing inflation, quick, lets increase interest rates to increase the housing costs.

Wait, it happened again!! More rises!

The beatings shall continue until morale improves
Whilst it's true that the RBA is mainly independent, and only has one lever to pull, the government itself has a lot more levers that it could pull in terms of fiscal policy, rate relief, targeted measures etc. It seems that the government hasn't been doing too much, and just happy to let the RBA take the flack, and act like it's nothing to do with them.
What you don't do is introduce inflationary measures like the qld premier has
Exchange rate is a double-edged sword.

It would make imports cheaper, which is largely a good thing unless you're a local manufacturer trying to compete with cheap imported goods.

But it makes exports more expensive on the global market, making our exports less competitive.

The "sweet spot" seems to be around 60 - 70c to the dollar.  Which is right where we're at at the moment.
Yeah he doesn’t know what he’s talking about lol
Interest rates also affect other loans, too - we talk about housing because it’s what the aspirants see, but it also affects credit cards, business lines of credit, etc. it’s mean to be a handbrake on lots of things, not just home loans. 

But you’re right - housing price growth remains high because demand is outstripping supply. If you read the RBA’s report, they cite household expenditure on utilities, transport and entertainment being strong, but also public spending on the NDIS, PBS and others being factors in total inflation. It’s like this perfect storm of misery. 

The headline comment from the RBA is that the demand for goods and services is outstripping supply across sectors. Housing is a factor, but it’s not the only factor.
Ah well yes but it does work out very well for them, so carry on! Damn the torpedoes!
It’s down 10% after making new ATH this year lol..
I wonder what happens if interest rates for individuals/couples for 2 or less properties were ring-fenced and lowered, while interest rates for all other borrowing went up, how might that affect things
Sure, but at the same time, they're not doing a lot to drive that conversation or ask for more levers. They specifically called out demand being too high in their speech after, something they don't have direct control over other than hitting already struggling people with a big stick, they could have called out the supply side issues, major profits of companies, Australia's exposure to global markets we shouldn't be exposed to.
The theory being that higher mortgage costs will drive down prices as investors are disincentivized from buying.  

Which is a stupid take because of 3 key factors:  
1. Investors can simply increase rent to cover the rate increases ("what are you gonna do? be homeless?")  
2. Investors can more easily weather interest rate hikes (more access to liquid cash & interest rates are good for negative gearing)  
3. Australian housing is such a rock solid investment that even when costs are high, the answer is to just buy more. At the end of the day - politicians are allowed to invest in property so why would they bother to rigidly regulate this market?
Maybe learn about modern monetary policy before complaining about rate setting.
Housing is not measured in inflation measures for this exact reason.
Well a large part of the point is to reduce consumer spending, so at that point why not just lower them for everyone?
It's amazing how many reddit experts there are who all disagree with the actual experts.
Point 1. Is not consistent with evidence. If a landlord could increase rents, they would. The rent a landlord is able to charge is unrelated to the mortgage repayments.

Point 2 is strange. Those most impacted by interesting rates are those with debt (investors). Those most resistant are those without debt (boomers) this is playing out in retail spending.

On point 3, I am hopeful this will change. NSW govt are making all the right noises.

On housing, something i care very much about, I'm hopeful of change. The pain we face here is not an interest rate problem, but one of supply. Housing should be cheap, with many options.

The NSW planning minister accepts the [housing theory of everything ](https://worksinprogress.co/issue/the-housing-theory-of-everything/) , something I find credible. Once you see it, you can't unsee it.
Thats why i left the 2 houses per individual caveat in there.  Mom & Pop can still have a cheap investment property  which means businesses and multiproperty landlords have to compete with them.
Tldr on modern monetary policy?
Errrr... CPI seems to include housing?  
[https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/economy/price-indexes-and-inflation/consumer-price-index-australia/latest-release#main-contributors-to-change](https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/economy/price-indexes-and-inflation/consumer-price-index-australia/latest-release#main-contributors-to-change)

~~I think it's rent rather than mortgage costs, though the two are obviously linked when so many landlords have mortgages.~~

"Since the September quarter 1998, the principal purpose of the CPI has been to measure inflation faced by households to support the operation of macroeconomic policy decision making. The CPI covers the expenditures of all households (not just those whose principal source of income is wages, as was the case before 1998) and measures the changes in the prices of a basket of goods and services acquired each period. The cost of housing is measured as the price of a new home (excluding land). Mortgage interest payments are excluded."

There we go, it measures the cost of a new home. Not the mortgage or rent. In theory raising interest rates should restrict the ability of people to get credit and bring this under control. In practice my house seems to have gone up 33% while the interest rates have been rising so who fucking knows.
Socialists i know think high rates increase wealth inequality and increase house prices.
Low rates mean debt being created faster then it paid off so money is supply expands 

Higher rates mean debt is being paid back faster so money supply contracts.

Most money is created by private banks for home loans. Rba does not do most of the money printing, it's done mostly by private banks
Rent is a line item in the CPI.
Yeah ok. There’s an argument that rent and mortgages are not related, but I don’t buy it.
