Drove past a worksite today, and turns out they use the bottles to show where they put stakes in the ground, because the stakes are hard to see and having bottles on them makes them much more visible. Genius! I never knew they needed the bottles for that. 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
I personally reckon it's cause Choccy Milk is fucken delicious, but maybe that's just me.
I think you're mixing up cause and effect.
If you read the nutritional info, you'll realise that iced coffees that come in bottles are basically morning-themed energy drinks.

They have the same amount of sugar as a can of coke and way more caffeine than an actual coffee.
makes me wonder what tradies in other countries do? Our choccy milk (and strawberry milk) is absolutely incredible in comparison to the shite offerings in other places. (e.g. NZ. With all the milk they make, and all the people who love a heavily flavoured, sugary drink - what is there that is equivalent to an Oak (or Dairy Farmers, etc)?)
Wouldn't be the milk flavour would it buddy?
It’s mostly the alcos and druggies that drink them coz they can’t take solids till afternoon
I have zero need for the bottles and I still drain a large oak mocha each day, it just tastes so damn good.
They just love sugar, caffeine and shiting their pants
I thought they had bottles to fill with piss and hide in walls in your house
*Coffee milk. Chocolate milk is for the kiddos
So it's like an amazing upcycle!
Geez, all these car crashes are certainly causing a lot of heavy rain.
I think the post was a joke...
Pretty much every sugary drink has about 10% sugar, it's weird how it doesn't matter if it's milk based, carbonated, or fruity.
It's probably the 9 teaspoons of sugar
You deserve those downvotes mate haha
Lol
