
I'm sure that team was praised in 2008. The current team deserves the spotlight now.
Is it conveniently forgotten or is it that’s it a just a cunty move to say “good job with this great accomplishment but btw another team was better”?
There really needs to be a character limit for post titles
Adults getting worked up over medal counts is weird.
Did Australia only send athletes with a high chance of winning in 2008? While in 2000 they sent anyone who qualfied?
Just ignore the media.

Seriously, we dont need graphs to tell us what we already know. The swim team has always cannibalise the media space and news cycles. Either by the media heroically celebrate their wins, or tearing them apart when they do anything at all but not win. The end. They build up all this rubbish of AU vs US, as if it the greatest grudge match ever. While other Aussies like the skateboarders and BMX are hanging out with the other countries in medals finals, like they are having a fun day out, in a fancy place.

Most times its like few other sports exist until they get a medal. Hell, half the time we dont even know an Aussie is going for one, if they arent swimmers.

Im not saying are swimmers arent great but what isnt great is how much attention, pressure, support and rubbish they get from the media. Anything less than perfection and apparently they have failed. Its been like that for decades.
Stats gathered from: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australia\_at\_the\_Olympics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australia_at_the_Olympics)
With the performance they are putting on, I can't wait to see how they fair against previous Olympics.
It's like the commentary is stuck in 2000 was more the observation I have seen.   
  
Comparisons against the previous Olympics makes more sense since a lot of competitors return but the repeated comparison against 2000 made me question what made that year special apart from it being here. 

So I threw numbers together to understand the hype, and it just didn't make sense - when 2004 and 2008 (and 2020) were better performances. 

I guess its all just nostalgia.
Problem: People only read headlines, they don't read the article

Solution: Put the entire article in the headline
As host nation you qualify in every sport. For example Handball, which we have never qualified for before or since. Get training for 2032.
Doesn't matter where the stats come from if the analysis is shit. The reason the team is so big is because so many more met the qualification standard.
The commentary is about how good our team is this year, playing it down by randomly bringing up other years to say this years team isn’t as good is just weird and a way to put them down.

We celebrate the team and how good they are it’s irrelevant if statistically x years team was better
This is I didn't know and makes a lot of sense.
There has also been an increase in the number of sports at the Olympics, since 2008 and thus the number of athletes attending.
As home country we got a bunch of people qualified for events automatically, e.g. we even fielded European handball and volleyball teams. We've not had that advantage again so of course future teams are smaller - but basically because the bottom end got culled.
