
As long as it doesn't lose money, a public option in all industries seems good. 

  
Keep bastards honest.
I'm no Labor voter, but Miles actually seems to be trying things that provide benefit. It's amazing how we can complain so much about the lack of effort from the government, but when they try something, then we complain about that too.
Cool trick- now do housing?
Skeptical about how this will actually pan out but these are the type of things I want my government pushing for.
The phat petrol margins are in wholesale, not retail. 

This is yet another instance where politicians want to be perceived as doing something, rather than actually doing it
It's a good idea, the time frame and costing however could be a little tricky. 
Public transport and housing might be the more important one to deal with though.
I like this guy
If we're going to nationalise and subsidise something, car infrastructure, really?

Subsidising this mode of travel fucking *devastates* the livability of cities - the places where most tax payers live. Taxpayers don't want to put money towards making their lives worse.
Aren't we trying to move away from petrol?
I thought we were trying to transition away from ICE’s? Won’t this just delay the transition we need to do?
Lol my original comment downvoted to oblivion. [It's a stupid idea. ](https://www.afr.com/policy/economy/qld-premier-promises-state-owned-petrol-stations-fuel-price-controls-20240806-p5jzvi). Petrol retailers make [about 3 cents per litre profit. ](https://www.whichcar.com.au/advice/how-is-fuel-pricing-decided-in-australia). A couple of stations to service the entire metro area so people can save a couple of bucks a week on fuel? Meanwhile the country is still dependent on foreign petro-states for all the oil that gets refined here. Really just a brain-fart of an idea which will, quite rightly, never happen.
About fucking time someone is suggesting some socialism to counter this late stage capitalism we are in.
Actually not a bad idea
Say what you will but I genuinely think Miles is a chad. Got in trouble for calling Scumbo Baggins a cunt, and making the coal industry pay for shit for QLDers out of royalties. Plus QLD Labor’s energy plan is unmatched compared to any other state party.
[deleted]
Let me guess. Sell them off for cents on the dollar in 5-10 years time?
Ehhh this smells like when Steve promised if elected to the primary school students committee that he’d get soda for all the drinking fountains.
Fascinating to see people twist themselves into pretzels explaining how we need government owned businesses but they have to make a profit. How do you expect a government run business, who by definition is less efficient that a private enterprise, to make enough profits to compete with petrol companies? This will just be passed on as another cost to taxpayers disguised as “cheaper” petrol
This has to be a joke, surely. 

How about introducing policies to get people out of cars dependent upon imported oil and into EVs instead?
[deleted]
Until he wants donations from the fuel companies.
“We promise.”

Hahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahaha.
He's dreamin
"Australasian Convenience and Petroleum Marketers Association chief executive Mark McKenzie told ABC Radio Brisbane it was unclear if Labor had the ability to implement the plan.

"I suppose the big thing is we're scratching our heads to sort of say, 'well how are they actually going to do that?'  
"There's no legislative mechanism or precedent, not just here in Australia \[but\] anywhere in the world."

Asked how he would legislate the price cap, Mr Miles said similar measures had been implemented in other states, with Western Australia requiring 24 hours notice before the price is increased."

See Fuel Watch WA you moron.
Not sure what peoples obsession with governments have to make money is.
And then the next mob comes  along and privatises the  stations and creates a bigger monopoly. 

I would believe in it if they placed these assets in a  sovereign trust fund  that is owned by taxpayers. Any government who wants to sell it or its assets would be require to  hold a referendum for disposal or sale. If the assets are sold the land should never be sold but a leasehold title granted to whoever buys the business. If the business folds then leasehold title is extinguished and not part of the liquidated assets. I doubt that the crooked politicians and their mates will agree to any of these conditions that protects the publics  funds and land.

The criteria for investing taxpayers money should be that whoever manages this business should work with goal of CPI plus 5% as a return. If you wanted to keep costs down then CPI plus 3% as a return or break even as a minimum benchmark.

This policy sounds like thought bubble while they dont want to address things like the planning approval processes in local councils that basically blocks independent service stations  from wanting to build service stations. When did you ever see a new private service station being built in any town like used to happen before in Australia? They put all sorts of rubbish obstacles in your way. 

 Try it sometime, putting a planning application for a service station, farmers market or mini shopping centre that will sell cheap goods. Watch how the mafia planning system comes up with all sorts excuses to block your application " residents, nimbys, traffic, environmental etc etc" While your application to do this is in a zone zoned business. I doubt people have any idea how corrupt the planning system is and how its controlled by the big name franchises, developers and shopping centre owners. 

The evidence  is there as you drive from town to town, all the same cookie cutter towns with the same franchise brands while nobody else outside of the system of networked corruption  can build a drive through takeaway, petrol station, strip shopping centre etc etc even in the smallest country towns. And the joke is that they will reject your application on the grounds of excessive traffic then the next week they install better roads, traffic lights and free parking for these " private enterprises"
There is no world in which this doesn’t lose money, otherwise why would it be needed?
Where are they going to purchase it from?
We used to have a publicly owned bank.  It kept all the other private banks honest 
The government should run things when either a) they're offering them as a service and running them at a loss is expected (see public transport) or b) when the marketplace is uncompetitive (see natural monopolies like utilities). 


Servos are operating in a competitive market and the profit margins are thin. There's not really any advantage to a government entering this particular market unless you're expecting them to operate at a loss.
But you're still going to vote for the party without any real policy?
Well look how long it takes to plan and build few houses by government processes. Imagine how long it would take to build 1 service station and just imagine the price after all the price gougers swoop in.
Sure, but when I bring up petrol spy, why can I see servos further out from the CBD of Brisbane being 20+ cents cheaper than the ones in there?

Wouldn't having a known cheaper alternative bring those prices down?
It is however _potentially_ less red tape than housing. Look how long it takes to plan and approve and cost just a hand full of public houses these days. 

Im willing to take this over nothing that’s for sure
Petrol stations deal with more than just cars. Consider this; The vast majority of domestic freight and logistics is handled by trucks, and those trucks account for about 2/5ths of the total fuel consumption in this country. Having a more stable fuel supply that is resistant to price gouging means most goods in this country become easier to get, and reduces the risk of cost fluctuations going forward. 

Given that, in addition to the financial benefits most other motorists will get, I'd argue that state run petrol stations are a good place to start, though personally I hope that other utilities see a similar kind of pressure from governments over time as well.
Dunno if this happens in your state but in SEQ we have some pretty [wild price fluctuations](https://i.imgur.com/OPtvWlm.jpeg). 

I don't care about 3c/L profit, but if state owned stations could potentially flatten out that nonsense then that would be great.
> Socialism is when the government runs a business in a capitalist market.

--- Carl Marks
How? I wasn't paying any less when I was in the Energex area.
I don't know why you're being downvoted, as if we haven't privitised everything before.
Only if we let the LNP gets their hands on them..
Wait isn't this comment like extremely dumb? They're not competing with the oil companies, they're competing the petrol stations. They buy the oil, they don't produce it afaik.  


Also why in the ever loving fuck would anyone be against at least trying this idea?  Of all the wasteful ways we waste money, this is one I'd get behind.  


Are you actually clowning? You have seen the writing on the wall for how privatisation has worked out for us?  
> who by definition is less efficient that a private enterprise

Nonsense - if you're measuring efficiency by profit, sure, whatever, but if you're measuring by resource consumption for output, the lack of profit incentive puts the paper cost-quality in government-owned corps favour.
>a government run business, who by definition is less efficient that a private enterprise

Care to back that up? Because every time something that was government owned gets privatised, the public ends up paying exponentially more. 

Private owned doesn't mean more efficient, it just means enshittification and shrinkflation and dumb cunts like you lap it up.
If it runs at a slight loss, and provides a public benefit, isn't that a good thing?
You mean like cutting the cost of [public transport to 50c](https://translink.com.au/tickets-and-fares/50-cent-fares)?
One step at a time. 
Why not both?
Or how about policies to get people out of cars entirely. They've made a start with cheaper public transport, now they just need to improve service reliability, bike lanes and walkability.
Or you know could offer EV charging like other servos are now
Wrong party.
What do you mean, this policy is for the benefit of the fossil fuel companies. They still get paid, but now the government is subsidising the cost which improves the long term viability of their product.
I think people have forgotten what a public good is, and why we fund it instead of funding the private sector and hoping they do some charity
It's the job of government to spend money (wisely), not hoard it like they're fuckin smaug. I know quite a few people who don't seem to get this (often conservatives). A government with a vast amount of surplus is not a good or normal thing.
If a government owned petrol station isn't making money, then tax dollars are subsidising fossil fuels for passenger cars. If it earns money, then the government is making money.
 
This really isn't difficult.
I think for some it’s more concern about the attitude that can be adopted in government led services - where expenditure doesn’t align with public interest or meaningful performance indicators, costing a lot of money to provide the wrong outcomes. This can be demonstrated through the expensive bureaucratic layer found in many government services which can be unproductive and even counterproductive at times, often at the cost of the publics access to meaningful services such as Centrelink call staff, ward nurses, etc.  

Privatisation can also be to our detriment as the government bleeding money to essentially support monopolies that they have no choice but to sustain at all costs, despite terrible outcomes for the public while shareholders make buckets (see auspost, Telstra). 

Public services should have expenditure that aligns with public interest and government sponsored privatisation should have KPIs and contracted service agreements that hold greedy corporations and boards to account and serve public interest.  Neither of those things happen that often, which causes a lot of public frustration.
When vital sectors of the economy are captured by corporate monopolies and cartels, they turn into profit-gouging operations.

Given the ACCC has been a complete failure at breaking up corporate monopolies and cartels, having a state government step in to offer a public option restores competition to that sector and also generates revenue for taxpayers.

Sometimes governments need to step in to save capitalism from itself.
Because these sorts of things become a sheltered workshop; overstaffed, over managed, over resourced and reduced pressure to meet standards. 

The way to boil down performance is; meet appropriate standards, do it for the least resources. Money is a great way to measure resources committed/consumed so the simple line in the sand is to make a profit (no matter how small).
>Not sure what peoples obsession with governments have to make money is.

In this case, it is a government owned business competing with other businesses. While I don't care much about the big chains, there are still franchisees and small operators who then have to compete with the government servo. If the government one is losing money, it's likely the small operators will be as well.

I believe that is why people are "obsessed with governments having to make money".
comes from neoliberal economic policy ideology
It's opportunity cost. 

If something like petrol stations are loss-making, it means the government can't do other programs like mental health, etc.
Yeah especially since they're already subsiding fossil fuel industries, that's already a loss.
People think of money in their own personal context where they must save up for retirement when they will no longer be earning.  Government doesn't work that way as it will always be earning an income.
For me, my preference for this sort of government service would be for it to make at least enough money to break even and cover its operating costs without requiring constant taxpayer injections just to operate business-as-usual. Making a bit extra to cover relevant upgrades, improvements etc for the service in question and/or to subsidise other government services that don’t directly make money would also be nice 

But in any case, it would be making money for the sake of maintaining the service, rather than for the sake of making money
To run a government like a business means to seek profit. And like a business, profits are privatised. It’s just a bad idea all round.
> And then the next mob comes along and privatises the stations and creates a bigger monopoly.

12 petrol stations spread across the state area going to be the basis of a monopoly?

I think it's an interesting idea, and fuck all investment by the government in the scheme of things. Certainly a better idea than sitting on their thumb waiting for private industry to form enough competition to drive down prices.
Could be better to make sure it never happens: to propose selling off the submitter is put to pasture. That way everyone *knows* it's important if it goes ahead rather than just dog cunts being offended that the government is doing things
All it needs to do is recover costs (break even) and it's fine.
So you assume I'm voting Liberal? Oh sweet summer child.
Can we not nationalise urban sprawn of single story 2 bedroom homes with no backyard, and instead build more high density public housing?
Have you considered that’s due to land costs of inner city locations? Why do you think that automatically means they’re price gouging consumers
Costs of running the servo. Land is more expensive…
The QLD government also made all public transport in the south east 50c per trip. This is part of a broader strategy to reduce cost of living.
>The vast majority of domestic freight and logistics is handled by trucks

Sadly.

Ought to build more rail.

"So build a train station at every loading dock?" No, that's what last-mile delivery is for. Then the distances are so short that electric trucks begin to make sense.

Also, in civil engineering, you have the 4th power law, which is where the wear on the road surface scales with axle load to the power of four. This means that a vehicle being twice as heavy causes sixteen (2^4 ) times the wear - still ten times the wear if the heavier vehicle has a 3rd axle ({(2÷3)÷(1÷2)}^4 ). This means that we stand to save a ludicrous amount of money on road maintenance.
Pretty much the same thing in WA. Don't get me wrong, high fuel prices are bad for us and the economy and I think certain things should be government owned but at the end of the day we are tied to global oil prices. The government would be buying wholesale fuel from the same place everyone else does so the better move would have been to build a refinery that's government owned instead of [giving away billions ](https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/multibillion-dollar-rescue-package-for-oil-refineries-20210516-p57sev.html)to private corporations. 

The only way to improve things is to reduce car dependency by improving public transport and active transport options, as well as encouraging the shift away from fossil fuels toward EVs.
Has to be another North Queenslander. Up here, Ergon is the only option. And they're not great, or particularly well-liked.
Parking the oil companies comment aside, their last point about all tax payers picking up the cost is correct. Taxpayers without a petrol car for whatever the reason shouldn't be picking up the bill so others can have cheaper fuel.
>Wait isn't this comment like extremely dumb? They're not competing with the oil companies, they're competing the petrol stations. They buy the oil, they don't produce it afaik.

A lot of the petrol stations are owned by oil companies/refiners (i.e. vertically integrated). Most of the price of fuel at the pump is underlying costs, wholesale profits and federal excise that the QLD Govt can't avoid, while little of it is retail profit.

I think it's weird policy for several reasons - first, it's naive to think they can compete on price while operating on a "cost recovery basis" when no producer is going to be selling to them at a reduced price (as is the case for the existing major players).

Second, imagine this succeeds and everyone drops their prices as intended. Surely the owners of a private servo aren't going to keep it open if it can't make a reasonable profit. Independents will be the first to go. BP, Shell, Caltex etc will hang on for a while, but they're going to shrink. Is driving out private servos part of the plan? Like if so, that's based af but I don't think this is what they actually want. (It's also not "increasing competition" when you drive competitors out of business)

Last I'll mention here, but what's the actual point of this policy other than to win votes? Making petrol a few cents cheaper saves consumers only a few bucks and incentivises them to drive more. Why are we incentivising people to drive their ICE vehicles more? (Yes, the state-run servos will also have EV charging, but come on and listen to what Miles said, this isn't where they're aiming to disrupt the market). This should be obvious as bad policy if you understand that anthropogenic global warming is caused primarily by fossil fuel emissions.
Who do you think runs petrol stations? Chevron and Ampol under either their own name or another brand name
What? That makes no sense, profit is the only way to measure success of running petrol stations
What are you basing that off? There’s no incentive to operate and maximise profits
If it runs at a loss than they are selling petrol too cheaply, or their operating costs are too high. And the Qld government would have to pick up the bill in either case.
 
What public benefit is there for spending tax dollars on subsidising petrol for car owners?
 
I just don't see how that is fair or equitable
doubt thats going to increase essential PT usage by that much though tbh.  
people might fuck off to wherever on the weekend coz its cheap.

I personally drive/ride my motorbike everywhere not because PT is too expensive but because PT is too shit.
>Mr Miles said the state-owned fuel stations would operate on a cost recovery basis and would sell petrol and diesel, alongside electric vehicle fast chargers.
They will be offering EV charging according to the ABC
problem is, lots of people  think 'fuck you, i got mine' and deplore the idea of money spent to the betterment of society
The government is hoarding negative billions
Conservatives who don't understand extremely obvious things?

It couldn't be!  Say it isn't so!
It is a good thing. The libs can't pilfer from nothing now can they? /S
Subsidising petrol is not wise.
Your tax dollars already subsidise fossil fuels. You don't think the constant western military presence (including Australians) in the middle east is because we care about democracy do you?
After the royal commission into aged care I can’t help thinking some services should be well and truly kept away from people looking to make profit.
Uh, auspost has exactly one shareholder, and it’s the federal government. Not the best example.
Auspost is not privatised
Except being exempt from the pressures of a market is what shelters these organisations from the worst aspects of it.

You don't solve those problems by turning them into commodities, you do it via actual oversight and good governance.
Should Queensland Health turn a profit?
I feel like thisbis a bit of old rhetoric that is just repeated without proper critical thought by a lot of people
Lol.  Have you ever looked at the upper management in a lot of private and public companies. Friends and family of the owners and the old school tie.  Talk about sheltered workshops
Cool, fuck the small operator bleeding everyone dry because they picked a shit industry to enter.

There is no way in the world I'm spending extra money to subsidise someone else's life because they can't compete.
It vastly reduces the regulatory costs on an industry because the private operators have to compete with an ethically run government supplier.


See the Commonwealth Bank and the royal Commission to what private industry does without government intervention 
On what basis though? Is cost recovery on the operational cost only or recovering the capital investment over a period of time? 

Building a servo is going to cost millions and take a significant periodic of time. How many millions depends on where. If it is fewer millions, then it will be somewhere a servo isn't really needed or won't be for a long time and will struggle to cover operational costs AND have no effect on prices, negating the whole premise of the project.

If it is more millions, there will be a really long lead time because of planning constraints and local opposition on top of really expensive land purchase price. The first part of that will require significant investment of time (public sector wages and doubtless private consultancy) on top of over the odds purchase price which will burden the project with so many overhead costs, breaking even (cost recovery) will be a pipe dream. 

If you abandon cost recovery, or do it only on operational cost, its cost structures will be completely out of step with what the industry can possibly compete with and then it will just drive nearby servos to the wall, creating a situation where the competitive factor becomes distance rather than price. Otherwise everyone in Brisbane would just drive to Aussie World to buy fuel 20 to 50 cents a litre cheaper than in say Cannon Hill or Chermside.

Then they have to work out what other stuff they will sell and what the opening hours will be. Is it going to be like a highway road stop with maccas, KFC, hungry jacks, subway and a Coolibah Coffee and an endless array of massively overpriced goods from Gerry cans and fishing rods, to stationery, oil and Mars bars, or will it be a bare bones local independent that hasn't had a facelift since he 1970s with broken toilets. The former make a lot of their profit from the the extras. The latter survive because of lower cost base.
When my partner and I were trying to buy, an asshat of a real estate agent was giving us his pitch, and was explaining how he values - schools, public transport yada yada, **public housing nearby**.

Firstly, what a stupid cunt you have to be to say that to a social worker. Secondly, as someone who grew up in Singapore it always shits me because public housing is just housing for literally 77% of the population.

Australia needs to get on that train already
Bruh me in melbourne with my $5.60 per trip. Jesus thats nice
I have good news!

The Qld govt has a massive rail building program  currently and 50c public transport fares six month trial that started yesterday.

Also their ev public owned charging program is the biggest in the country extending up to cairns and now starting into the west.

The public petrol stations will be small fry in comparison
> high fuel prices are bad for us and the economy 

Over the short term yes. 

But if they were higher to account for the negative externalities of cars in general then it would actually be better long term to price them accurately. (and the quicker certain things are done the cheaper they're going to cost (and more economic benefit. but hey got to have more coal mines.))
What I meant was, I moved from Brisbane (Energex) to an Ergon area, and my bills did not go up. They're regulated and can't price gouge.
Oh buddy wait until hear about the ndis lol. 


This could actually make an impact as to create competition between petrol stations and could set a precedent for other essentials goods/ services (looking at you colesworth). 


It's not a bad idea in slightest and should be encouraged. 
So you're just straight Libertarian? Why should healthy people have to pay tax to fund Medicare when it's sick people using it? Why should people whose houses aren't on fire pay taxes to fund the fire brigade? Etc, etc.


Maybe have a think for 5 seconds because I'm positive that plenty of people are paying taxes towards things that assist you, but don't benefit them directly.
Why wouldn't private servos make a profit? We are constantly told that private industry is more efficient than the government. Those efficiencies are their profit, it'll be easy money.
If your goal is to supply affordable petrol to citizens and companies, no it's not.

That's like saying foodbanks are a failure compared to supermarkets because they don't make money.
"Maximise profits" you mean the same way Coles and Woolworths are doing? The same behaviour that's resulting in both shrinkflation and enshittification (as I mentioned before)? "Maximise profits" is  just code for "charge the most possible for the least amount of the lowest quality product possible".
Ask the government how fair and equitable all the current fuel subsidies are for major companies while us the average user gets bent over. Im all for us getting the benefit for once not the companies who take our cash then charge us even more.
It's not fair and equitable... many people don't drive/use a car, but now they, too, will be stung with paying for this through taxes.  Currently, the costs are dealt with by those who do drive, but it makes for a damn good headline to suckered in some voters
It’ll make living and working in the cities a little less ridiculous on cost for those that already use it which is absolutely a good thing.
This is a major issue in Australia imo. People don't realise that we could have it good and we could be mostly looked after if our money was well spent on public facilities/resources etc.
Sir, this is a suburban petrol station
Or worse, organisations deliberately designed not to make a profit
I guess not, but the problem being a ‘fiscally responsible’ board that all the same makes decisions to the detriment of the quality of service the public receives (and also pays for).
Pumpin' gas is not that hard mate. It doesn't need a committee of APS workers overseeing each petrol station.
There's a difference between a service & a private business
The bits that can be broken down into bite sized chunks (meal provision, taxi services, cleaning, building expansion, road maintenance, lawn trimming, hotels for staff away from home, Microsoft excel training, software development, farming food, 3rd party audits, etc), absolutely yes. 

Things that can't be; policy development, accountability, direct subsidy provision (hard to zero out costs when the job is to donate), very niche/one of a kind skills/system, asset ownership/stewardship, etc.

So overall, QLD Health won't turn a profit but insisting that the government owning petrol stations is the same as the government managing QLD Health is a false equivalence.
So is the Calories in = Calories out mantra of controlling weight. Some people do indeed repeat it without critical thought. It doesn't make it wrong however.
>There is no way in the world I'm spending extra money to subsidise someone else's life because they can't compete.

Can't compete because the taxpayer (you) are spending extra money to ensure the govt run option is selling for less than it costs to run the business. If have zero problem if the govt option was set up to sell at zero net profit because we know govt industry is almost always less efficient.
They are competing? wtf are you talking about?
I would much rather see an increase in tax on petrol hungry vehicles so that more fuel efficient cars can be subsidised. I suspect that painting petrol companies as bad, scores the labour party more political points though than saying big cars are bad.

I don't think it's a bad idea either, it's creative at least. I do think it's unnecessary though and there are existing processes that could be leveraged first.
That's a big straw man argument you have pulled there. I am all for taxpayers subsidising things, not petrol though.
That’s idiotic, unless you’re going to argue that everything should be socialised
> Why wouldn't private servos make a profit?

By the logic of this announcement, the government will operate their servos as non-profits, and hence drive down prices. The existing servos will have to sell for the same or less to compete with the government ones. Again, following the logic of this plan, won't servos also have to sell at little-to-no profit or a loss? (Note I wrote "can't make a reasonable profit", because the big finance brains running the servos won't be interested in keeping open an outlet that's making a tiny profit when their profitability is the basis of the share price that their bonuses are calculated from.)

>We are constantly told that private industry is more efficient than the government

Not by me, but by the logic of the people who you are strawmanning, this is the case of a free market, specifically it is an argument against intervention. The principle doesn't apply when the government is setting out to undermine private industry.

I mentioned reasons why I don't even think the government can compete on price in the first place and this is all a big handout to people who own big cars and drive everywhere at the expense of anyone who wants to breathe fresh air and not see the world burn around them. I'm all for intervention in the fossil fuel market, just in the exact opposite direction where we break up the big fossil fuel companies, and accelerate the transition to zero carbon renewables.

I don't even know why I'm bothering thinking about this because it's all predicated on the assumption that this will ever happen, which it won't. Assuming QLD Labor get back in (and the numbers must be really bad given recent ALP "policy announcements" like this one), it'll either be forgotten immediately or at best go through the budget office and be found to be too expensive.
How do you class affordable? Is it affordable if the cost is passed on in your taxes where you end up paying more because they’re less efficient operators than oil companies?
Their profit margins are publicly available, at what point are Coles and Woolworths price gouging
I’m a dumb fuck who doesn’t know how that works. I’ve heard of the concept but don’t know enough to point the finger.
If petrol just spontaneously appeared at petrol stations of its own volition, you would be correct, but it's actually a broad, often complicated logistics chain to keep every station supplied.
It sounds like you are essentially saying that in order to prevent waste in the system, we should add waste into the system in the form of profit.
Over the short term, yes CICO isn't always correct, but in the long term it will work; you can't beat the laws of thermodynamics.
Got news for you buddy have a look at how many companies already get subsidides fuel 8ncluding every mining company in this country!
Good grief, fReE mArKeT eFfIcEnCy. There is nothing about private enterprise that makes it inherently efficient.
Not for profits still have to make a profit or they go bankrupt. All of them intend to grow, for which they need money, so not not make a profit. The biggest cost of any undertaking is the land and buildings. Everyone knows they are really expensive, so not for profits are either operating in a way that will. allow them to accumulate sufficient funds to pay off borrowing to establish themselves or at least to replace what they have in the future but usually so they can expand as well. The not for profit bit is primarily about tax treatment and market positioning. Not for profit also allows for donation taking which is also tax deductible for the donors. Another revenue stream. Some are standalone which means they have directors and executives who are rewarded for not only their time and expertise but also for the fact that they are under specific statutory obligations  as well. Some have very high motivations and others do not. Some have structures where the operation is not for profit, but the infrastructure the operations use are an accumulating asset that is held separately. Then you have churches which are extraordinarily wealthy and seem to provide some of the worst examples of service delivery while maintaining the biggest rel estate portfolios in the country
And done nearly entirely by for-profit businesses with policy and standards stuff being the responsibility of the government. You are making my point for me.
Yes, supervision costs money. Whether it is in the form of a large organic oversight team or to farm out bits and contract manage it, there is costs.  A senior APS person is hundreds of k - half million (including on costs) a year and only available for \~34 hrs a week. Letting some private sector dudes get a few hungy k profit is not the end of the world.

What doesn't happen is people getting operated on without any oversight, standards or QAQC process and it all just works. I thought this would be obvious.
Exactly, CICO can be very misapplied, and solving CICO for an individual often requires solving other issues first. That is where the critical thought is required. 

But the truism of CICO is a law of thermodynamics as you say.
There is, price incentives. Businesses that aren’t efficient won’t be in business for very long because they’ll run out of cash. The same thing can’t be said for public enterprises
Obviously the model of the American healthcare system, and if you think that is better than here then I guess you are entitled to your own opinion.

I think the vast majority of Australians see the core components in the system through a social lens rather than a strictly materialistic and transactional one.

Profit and reduction of waste is not even close to the main driver of more social systems. Healthcare is so much more impactful than how much cash comes through the direct operation of a hospital.

Believe it or not, I would argue that fuel/energy actually is, too. But hey, we all have our own opinions.
The Australian system is not the opposite of the US system, it is kind of in between the US and the UK system which the Australian system also out-performs significantly. 

The big problem with the US system is not that it can't provide good care - it absolutely can deliver world class /best in class care. It does it woefully in-efficiently. That is what everyone hates about it. It is expensive for what it delivers.

And you are here arguing that it doesn't matter if a system is inefficient?
I don’t mean this in a conflict kinda way, but I think you somewhat misunderstood my argument.

I never implied the Australian system is the opposite. The US system is merely the most adherent Western system to a stronger weighting of a capitalistic approach with weak governing oversight. So to completely put aside the UK system as irrelevant here, the US system is used to show a more profit-based operation.

Just because the medical system is more profitable, that isn’t why we want a medical system in our society - we want it to address many, many more complex needs than that and it’s core function is to sustain a predetermined level of basic healthcare. Profitably is not good or bad in this, it is somewhat irrelevant outside of a raw need to sustain the system. But, as a government-run system, that can be recouped in other ways.

So, to address you final line - yes, to some degree, it is irrelevant if the system itself is efficient in the way you propose to measure efficiency, because unlike the US we measure efficiency far more on the health outcome of the patient that the low operational cost of business.

Our system isn’t inefficient, it just may not be important to optimise that particular aspect of the efficiency equation in the case of a critical social need/utility.


EDIT: To add to a point I missed in your answer - that is not why most people don’t like the US system. The system is not just inefficient and expensive - it is prohibitively unfair. Because it is profit-based, it is not universal in its coverage. People don’t like it because it doesn’t actually do what we think a medical system should do regardless of the cost - it doesn’t actually help society as a whole, it helps the wealthy very very effectively and completely shits the bed with pretty much everyone else, leading at times to even worse health outcomes as people have no access to preventative care precisely due to the profit-based model of the system.

Because of this example most Australians do not want to really force the system or any subcomponents into your proposed model because it has fairly clearly failed what we as Australians view as important to our desired outcome - equality of access. The fair go.
