
I assume it means the current proposal so they will need to modify it and re-submit to make it acceptable.
Until a donation makes it OK
Oh no! Anyway...
It's sad we choose to remain uneducated on how much the gas and coal industries are fucking over Australians and it's wildlife. They are consistently taking all our resources for pretty much free. Making massive profits with little to no tax. Selling it to other countries and then talking shit on how WE have a gas shortage. People need to have these discussions and stop voting for the two party systems who adhere to the big corporations. I hope through the sharing of punter politics and the younger generation who are becoming voters we can develop a government that actually works for the people not the corporation's. It's time to have [royalties](https://australiainstitute.org.au/report/australias-great-gas-giveaway/) for our resources like Denmark.
This is a bit weird because the Prelude floating lng plant is already moored at scott reef. I was on the rig that drilled the exploration holes and the ship that did the survey for the anchor points.
So we don't have enough gas and now this is rejected based on nothing? Seems crazy.
Yep. It's a preliminary assessment, these things go around a few times.

For example Eni's Blacktip EP had 5 revisions responding to the regulator deeming controls ineffective and requiring further information similarly EOG hit 7 revisions for Beehive. It's part of the process.
We have plenty of gas, Its just a overly large chunk of it is exported instead of having a decent portion staying locally for manufacturing use etc.

All new Fossil fuel based projects should be denied, They aren't required going forward.
yeah, I guessed as much so the Guardian doing its usual disingenuous reporting again. By "Major Blow" they mean "normal course of business".
[deleted]
[deleted]
We are one of the largest gas exporters in the world.  We sell gas so cheaply to the Japanese that Japanese companies can on sell our gas to other countries and make a profit.  

We would have to redirect only a small amount to domestic markets to satisfy our needs.
[deleted]
[deleted]
