As the title suggests, Uncle Toby's have changed their biscuit recipe in the LeSnak and I am not impressed
If I had to describe the change, it's more like a Ritz Crackers
It's lost all crunch and is more crumble

It'll be easy to identify as they've changed the packaging of the individual packs (see attached pic)

I say we start a revolution and bring Uncle Toby's back down to earth

Absolutely despicable, you should be ashamed of yourself UT
Uncle Tobys is owned by Nestle now, throw the whole snak away
No wonder ASIO raised the National Terrorism Threat Level.
r/fucknestle
Think this would be better suited for Uncle Tobys' customer support.
Wow very important thanks for letting us know this will change my life
Already tasted like shit, can't have changed much
Why do they not sell the dip in adult sized portions?
Outrageous. But then again, surely nobody older than a toddler would eat this….so…who cares?
Who cares? Stop eating this microplastic rich ultra processed food. You don't have to do what corporate says.
So they've gone back to how they were in the 90s and I can eat them again!
Thanks, but I didn't think anyone above primary school age still ate them.
My toddler won't care...

Who else eats these, the cheese paste is absolutely disgusting
Don't buy these ridiculous single-serve snacks with their excess packaging. Buy some crackers that you like (there are lots of brands to choose from, so there's gotta be one you like), and buy a jar of processed cheez spread. Or, some actual dip made from real ingredients.

You'll save lots of money, too. Would likely work out that you get three or four times as much food for the same price.
And by now, you mean the better bart of the last 20 years (2006). 
Fun fact, all the Colesworth home-brand cornflakes are made by Uncle Toby’s.
They didnt really have any taste before but less crunch will suck.
Any cheese that doesn't need refrigeration is the devil..
As far as cereal goes, I’m honestly not sure what is worse - Nestle or Sanitarium who pay no tax as they are owned by the seventh day Adventist church. 

Best bet - don’t eat cereal.
