
Dutton creates a hostile for everyone not named Gina or Rupert or Barnaby.
well the previous government was run by a religious fundamentalist and it was pretty shit...
If the roles were reversed and it went like.

'The prime minister, if he's in a minority government in the next term of parliament, it'll include Jewish/Hindu/Buddhist candidates from Sydney. It will be a disaster.'"

Im sure that will be fine right ?

  
Lets face it , it was a dog whistle. Its how they operate.   
They dont want to say something overtly racist. Equating race with religion is the closest they can come.   
Ironically ignoring that the world largest muslim country is very close to us.
Well yeah, of course, dutto operates by trying to get people scared then presenting himself as safety.
"Mr Dutton said:  'The prime minister, if he's in a minority government in the next term of parliament, it will include the Greens, it'll include Green-Teals, it'll include Muslim candidates from Western Sydney. It will be a disaster.'"


Keep religious zealots out of politics generally, never mind their preferred brand. 


It seems a bit of a reach to say that Dutton incited violence though by saying that. He's not my cup of tea but he's hardly a firebrand calling for blood on the streets. Just an idiot.
Peter Dutton contributed to a 'hostile environment' for ~~Muslim~~ Australians
That’s what he specialises in, division and escalation of peoples fears.
In other news, the sun rose this morning.
[removed]
Haha classic.  Another article providing the context for Dutton’s comments - this time reporting on comments in exactly the same vein by the PM, is at the bottom of the page.  But we can all just go on pretending like we aren’t aware and that Dutton was just randomly vilifying muslims.

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-07-05/anthony-albanese-fatima-payman-muslim-vote/104063568
Is it not driven by the hostility of the people following those religions as well? 


I've personally experienced being called a "jin" by these exact people who want to say they're marginalised now. 


Conquering lands and expanding their religious power is literally part of their indoctorine. 
[deleted]
has someone shipped him his clown outfit yet? hopefully with comically large shoes with bells on them so people can run away when they hear him approaching.
Dutton is a Zionist.
Of course he does. And still will. He’s a thug after all.
Well at least the Israelis and Gazans aren't dragging everyday Australians into any kind of political conflicts on their own behaves.
Sure Albo has the cheque book open for Duttons lawyers.
Basically, the anti-Islam dogwhistle has been a Liberal Party staple for a quarter of a century now. Dutton is the latest in a fairly long line of awful people who have been the standard bearers of this thing.


We just need to look over at the UK at the moment and see where that goes. And of course, look at the Cronulla Riots again. This is the result of the conservatives deliberately ripping apart the social fabric for their own selfish, electoral benefit. 
[removed]
Shhhhh, don't give Voldemort ideas!!
> Ironically ignoring that the world largest muslim country is very close to us.

I would be surprised if the average Australian knew this, it's rare to talk to someone who doesn't think that Muslim and Middle-Easterner are synonyms.
I assure you, Dutton is far scarier than any of the things he claims to be safety from


such a fucking creep
He doesn't have to directly say it. He's very calculated. He plants the seed and waits for something small to happen before jumping out screaming, "see, I told you!"
But he has good form dog whistling up African immigration and youth crime because ultimately he wants violence and gang wars to break out. Thats his aim and the likes of Sky News who are fixated with brown people every day on their media channels trying to stir up hate that divides the community. Just like is now occurring in the UK which suits there agenda. Then there's Pauline, their  favorite media dog whistling tart.
> It seems a bit of a reach to say that Dutton incited violence though by saying that. He's not my cup of tea but he's hardly a firebrand calling for blood on the streets. Just an idiot.

You need to learn what stochastic terrorism is, dog whistling can absolutely lead to violence. Just ask yourself, why did he specifically mention that they were Muslim's and not some other attribute? What group have they spent years demonizing and pushing hatred against, what group has become the boogeyman since 9/11 and is constantly assumed to be behind any evil, which group has the media spent just as long trying to create as a synonym for terrorist, etc...

To try and claim he's just acting like a bumbling fool is -exactly- what he wants, he can pretend that he has no idea what he's doing while furthering bigotry and hatred out in the open.
>"Mr Dutton said:  'The prime minister, if he's in a minority government in the next term of parliament, it will include the Greens, it'll include Green-Teals, it'll include Muslim candidates from Western Sydney. It will be a disaster.'"


A minority government will contain a diversity of viewpoints that represents broad swathes of the Australian population? Apparently disastrous. 


Admittedly, this would not be an easy government to lead, but minority governments never are. However, I'm pretty sure that's not what Dutton means. The idea that people with viewpoints different to his own might get a say in the running of the country is an anathema to him. In his world, women and minorities should know their place apparently. 
https://i.imgur.com/OT4duSJ.png
You mean look at the far right white dudes destroying their own country?
The violent riots are perpetrated by the far right

> “People in this country have a right to be safe and yet, we’ve seen Muslim communities targeted, attacks on mosques, other minority communities singled out, Nazi salutes in the street, attacks on the police, wanton violence alongside racist rhetoric,” Starmer said at Downing Street.

https://edition.cnn.com/2024/08/05/uk/uk-far-right-protests-explainer-gbr-intl/index.html

> UK far-right riots: everything we know

https://www.politico.eu/article/uk-far-right-britain-lawyer-keir-starmer-violence-liverpool-muslims-cardiff/

> Far-right riots continue in UK, nearly 400 arrested in week of violence

https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/8/6/far-right-violence-continues-in-uk-nearly-400-arrested-in-week-of-unrest
Whatever you say NAME-NUMBER 10 day old account.   
  
I really do wonder if the russian troll farms are going hyper this year because of the US elections.
[removed]
The 2024 report is pretty sobering. Australians willing to sell out their own country for money or prestige. Foreign governments attempting to find back doors to store for a later date in critical infrastructure. And nationalist extremism. Literally the 1/2/3 of taking down Australia.

[Over the last 18 months, we’ve also seen an uptick in the number of nationalist and racist violent extremists advocating sabotage in private conversations, both here and overseas.  It’s particularly pronounced among ‘accelerationists’ – extremists who want to trigger a so-called ‘race war’.  We have seen them endorsing attacks on power networks, electrical substations and railway networks.](https://www.oni.gov.au/news/asio-annual-threat-assessment-2024)

If anyone around you is attempting to start a discussion based on race or negatively dividing Australians based on race, ironically you can expect it’s a foreign government and more than likely be correct. Look at Russia getting bank dividends from spamming facebook, instagram, reddit and other social media during the 2016 and 2020 elections. The same will occur in Australia between now and mid next year for the election.

So yeah, play the game with me “are they a racist or are they a country’s bot farm trying to divide Aussies so we fight among ourselves rather than them.”
The guys who back in the day would have been rounded up and sent overseas to practice their thuggery on the local populace in the name of empire...
