
So they've held the lease for 33 years, done nothing with it, and now the government wants to not renew to fold the land into the national park, ERA suddenly wants to use the land?

Get fucked.
They had 30 years and did nothing. The traditional owners don't want it, the government's are against it. Nah, screw em.
May they fail, and waste lots of money on the attempt.
Yeah, they can go the fuck right off.
I'm really loathe to side with a mining company, but.... Mines are often left unexploited when the price of the mineral present is under a specific value. This is because it costs money to run a mine. Fuel, equipment, people and housing all cost money. The amount of profit is directly tied to the value of the processed ore. Below a certain point the mine becomes nonviable. Uranium isn't currently worth much.

The companies concern is that if they get locked out, they can't re-open the mine when the price goes up. Hence the lawsuit. An increase in the price of uranium due to demand is very likely. Nuclear projects are starting up as a means to meet CO2 emissions while reducing dependency on fossil fuels. The fact that Australia doesn't do nuclear is not relevant to the global price of uranium. Nuclear will grow, panicked, shrieking of the "green" movement not with standing.
And be directed to pay costs.
We understand the economy of mining in Australia derp derp. It's too bad for them. It's not the 'green' movement. It's in the middle of what is otherwise a national park already, and the traditional owners don't want it. So fuck off with your loathing. Screw those cunts.
I used to be upset about mining. Then I bought something made from steel. I used to be upset about the oil and gas industry. Then I filled up my tank with petrol. I have no desire to go back to living in a cave.  I suspect, neither do you. So, we will need to mine for energy and materials. Uranium and it’s power generation side nuclear power require the *least* amount of material per megawatt produced. [It’s vastly better to mine uranium than coal. ](https://xkcd.com/1162)
Fuck that's being a reductionist cunt. What a smarmy git. 'Then I bought something made from steel'. 

It's vastly better is it? If you've got a reactor. We don't have any and are decades minimum 😂 even if they are serious about building one rather than just using it as a cover for ditching alternative energy and continued use of coal and gas anyway. So just yeh...nah. stick some rebar up ya m8.
Is this the only place on Earth that has uranium? No? Then mine it somewhere that isn't in the middle of a national park.

As this is estimated to be one of the largest uranium deposits on earth, then it should encourage ERA to find a way of extracting that uranium without disturbing the environment. Desperation (in this case, for a profit) is usually the father of innovation.

If they can't/won't innovate, then they can fuck right off.
The point is that the waste stream from nuclear is vastly smaller than everything else. It’s not even close. Assuming we care about the environment.
