
Easy for these people to proclaim values of liberty when they no longer yield the power of the pen.
The boy who would be Premier spouting dickhead nonsense on his way out. An utter failure of a politican.
Got himself a job at a right wing think tank starting next week?
Says the ex- premier who just picked up a sweet job in the US to be boss of BHP. I mean clearly he did such a great job being premier that he got the job on merit, right? <insert Anakin + Padme 'Right... right?meme>
Who cares?
Easy to say when you aren't dealing with the fuckfest.
Who gives a fuck, it's like 4 years gone now. Cookers need to find something new to sook about, this shit is dated.
Coward
Interesting.
Yes, the timing does make it appear to be quite an easy, convenient statement to make. Right before taking up a high profile position in US.
He was a pretty centrist and pragmatic politician, which is more than you can say for 90% of them. He attempted reform to difficult areas such as removing stamp duty, through the trial of a land tax, but this was dropped by Minns. 

Say what you want about Perrottet, but the man had more policy ideas than I’ve seen from all of the current state government combined.
Why do you think he'd be motivated to make such an outlandish claim as the mandates were wrong? Who is he appealing to.
BHP. 
Wrong - mining company
Why do you suppose he said such an obviously untrue thing?
All those who didn't agree with mandates but needed to to keep their jobs.
Come, come. Let's resist the lust to debase ourselves by filling up our own mouths with excrement.
It's interesting from a public discourse point of view. Not a cooker point of view.
Wow. BHP really got a winner right there. Hope he has the backroom connections for him to exploit to feather a corporation over the Australian people.
Lube is a by product of petrochemicals. He will get a discount so he can squeeze another couple of kids out from his wife’s ravaged fanny
Close enough
Well he's a politician who moved straight into a highly paid executive job so i'd imagine lying is part of his skillset.
And what’s happened to the people who got vaccinated? I thought I was supposed to get heart failure in 2022 or something?
During a global pandemic we choose to listen to epidemiologists and infectious disease experts not cookers, signed everyone.
People aren't owed public service jobs. Vulnerable members of the public shouldn't be prevented from safely using hospitals and schools etc because some nutjob doesn't want to get a jab.
You mean them cookers?
Absolutely.
But seriously, why do we even need to have public discourse?

On what?

The fact that some politician with no immunology or medical background who has historically had right-leaning conservative values talking about a mask mandate during the height of a past pandemic being wrong?

Who cares, this discourse does nothing of value and contributes exactly zero benefit to anything.
Jfc
Close but still wrong. Sorry.
I read on Facebook that 72 bajillion people died from Bill Gate's tracking vaccine! Are you saying that's wrong?
They're all walking around pretty healthy is what happened to them
That's a fair choice
That's a perfectly valid point of view and an interesting facet of the public discourse. If the vaccines were not effective at preventing transmission, would that modify your viewpoint at all on the matter?
Just regular folk who went along with it and didn't complain too much
Why do we need to have public discourse. Is that a serious question? 

I know it's a difficult topic to engage with. There is value in public discourse, even this one.
The vaccine altered my DNA to the point where I am unrecognisable so good luck tracking me now Bill
Well then who gives a fuck
I'm a little confused. So, they should be.. complaining? What's happened that is negative here?
What's with all these milquetoast replies? There is no public discourse. This is old news, and the only people who agree with Perrottet are selfish morons. There were arguably morally wrong things done during covid, but making public servants get vaccinated was not one of them.
The vaccines:

1. reduced transmission;

2. reduced the risk of infection; and

3. reduced the severity of infection.

Perrottet is trying to argue that because the vaccines were not perfect (no vaccine is) they were ineffective and not useful. This is retconning bullshit. They were hugely important by limiting the virus's infection rate and lethality.
No. Cookers.
Let me dumb down the question for you then since you're not seeming to grasp things.   
  
Why is there a need for discourse about what a politician thinks on a medical matter that has has been over for years now? 

It's like me posting on reddit that I think school teachers should be grading students differently. 

It's stupid, because just like this so-called "discourse" I have no fucking idea about what actually goes into teaching.  
  
Just like dominic has zero experience or study into immunology and the people that do, actual immunologists and doctors, have collectively agreed that they were of net benefit to the population during covid.
I morphed into a sentient carrot, it's cold in the ground, but at least I get to tell my wife to root vegetable!
What do you care
Tell us what you think?
You're both engaging with, creating and contributing to the public discourse right now, as we speak. What were some of the things you claim were arguably morally wrong that were done during covid?
I understand your argument. Notwithstanding the gaping holes in your logic, you are attempting to assert that enforcing vaccine mandates and lockdowns is a purely medical science realm and not at all a political one.
Are you alright?
No crane operator I know would say 'icky'
And there it is, the cooker ideology that this was all some government play to gain control of the population. 

Good job bud, you've just proven my point at why this discourse provides zero benefit to actual rationally thinking people.
It's a turnington
Dickens, dude.
That is certainly a thing you think
The irony is you're actively contributing to and creating the public discourse right now, even as you become upset by it.
Hardly upset champ, just shocked there are some people as thick as you. 

Keep trying to not cope that the world didn’t go to hell like every cooker assumed it would from the “big bad vaccines”.
