
I love how WA just sat there quietly hoping nobody would notice them while NSW got smaller.
Until 1841, New Zealand was administered as part of New South Wales.
It's missing full "North South" South Australia.
Needs another map showing the splitting of the NT from 1927-1931.
Where did ACT go? And wtf happened to old Van Diemens land to change colour in 1800s?
Missed Central Australia, 1927-1931
It makes New South Wales seem like the geographical equivalent of Lorem Ipsum
need to include New Zealand was part of NSW until 1841 :)

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colony\_of\_New\_South\_Wales](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colony_of_New_South_Wales) (scroll down to separation of NZ)
Chart is wrong. Tasmania was called Van Diemans Land in 1803.
State of origin was shit until 1859
Where’s Hutt River Province?
Always good to see how long we have been un creative with names in this country....
The grey bit was called 'New Holland' until 1832, although it'd be somewhat more interesting to see a white and aboriginal map of actual spheres of influence changing between 1600 and now
>(whispers) they never got western australia
ACT erasure smh
Look how they massacred my boy..
Is it the Northern Territory or the Northern Territories? 

Where is the ACT?
Australian Capital Territory?
[deleted]
New south wales looks like it lost a war
We had to shuffle things around to make NSW actually be in the south, because naming half the country after the south of wales made no damn sense and having two of them wasn't an improvement.
Well today I learned that the ACT isn't eligible to be put anywhere on this picture except "after 1911". But I don't see it.
What was the reason to create new states?
Annnnd you forgot Act...
NSW < NSW *in red*
W.A for the win 🥇
Every Queenslander is in shock now that they know the truth, that NSW was QLD…
Look at that! NSW is the grubby leftovers that no one wanted.
Australia never had those splits in the bottom of SA either, looks ridiculous asf lol
If we keep going we may actually be able to get rid of NSW entirely
What about French Western Australia in 1772?

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Western_Australia
Missing 1863, where until 1911 the Northern Territory was part of South Australia. It wasn't anything else, it wasn't central Australia which then split into North and South. No it was just all called South Australia after the Northern Territory was annexed into South Australia in 1863, with the Northern Territory being called "The Northern Territory of South Australia".

[Sorce](https://www.findandconnect.gov.au/entity/law-in-the-northern-territory/)
The title is wrong. It wasn't Australia in 1788, it was literally just New South Wales.
I vote we keep trimming NSW back.
New Zealand was New South Wales too for most of that time
missed out northern and central australia.

As well as PNG and NZ being under aus
So, why didn't South Australia go all the way to the WA border?

I have done some reading on this and it's quite complex. It was a combination of the settlers to the SA colony wanting more - all the way north to where the Northern Territory is now (remember it was called the "Northern Territory of South Australia" in some maps}

The idea of SA was non-convict and no one really had explored the interior to the west of that border. The UK Parliament thought the area of the Free Colony was more than enough. There was a bit of debate on that.

Also, there are maps available after 1836 showing the QLD border to be a continuation of the SA border. It then makes more sense as it looks like SA is clinging to the more populous SE of the continent. Thus, there seemed to be an idea that QLD would be coming

Plus, the British always seemed to have a thing for nonsensical straight-line borders.  
If you could correct me on this, please do! I would love more info.

EDIT\_ God this is poorly wriitten
Suck it NSW.  We're coming for you.
Now I see where that first state comes from on license plates
Soon NSW will be a city of Victoria
There need two more maps. One being where South Australia taken up all of what is now South Australia and Northern Territory, and the other being when there was the Northern Territory and Territory of Central Australia.
I was told that what is now the Northern Territory used to form part of South Australia, but in these maps it's listed as New South Wales. 🤔
L to R, T to B. What kind of savage goes T to B, L to R
2048: republic of australia
2056: NSW takes back whats ours
1788: Cat Australia and Dog Australia
Man, State of Origin must've been boring from 1788-1824...
So the big question is “Where is ACT?”
So....  
Melbourne is a NSW city.  
It was founded in 1836 as the southern port of NSW.  
The state of Victoria didn't exist until 1851.  
Thus, Melbourne was founded in NSW, it's a NSW city, originally.  
  
[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Victoria\_(state)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Victoria_(state))
So up to 1788 WA was just called “over there”?
Look at them all taking our state and then claiming to be better, then there's just WA like "yeah you guys have fun"
At this rate NSW will cease to exist in a decade or two
Lol, who needs the ACT anyway
I didn’t grow up in Australia so forgive me here. Why was SA a state well before Vic?  Wasn’t  Melbourne a lot older and bigger or did that only happen with the gold rush?
NSW dodged a bullet
1788 looks alot like 2024
Doesn’t matter the size still the most expensive
[Explorers naming places](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOBhf8f7cXM) payoff starts 2m10s in.
Yep, 1825, that’s when we really had a shot.
You are telling me that historically we won each state of origin?
We must restore New South Wales to its righful borders!!
The Northern Territory was part of South Australia from 1863 to 1911.
Fuck that little slice of SA they didn't claim until they had to lol
Man Australia is a really young country. Wild how far it's come in 100 years.
Is NSW a new Wales in the south, or a newer version of South Wales?
Imagine we were only 2 states … State of Origin would be easy, east vs west
I spent a good few minutes staring at the last two trying to see the difference. 

I kept thinking "they are the same bloody shapes".
This is terribly inaccurate
Wasn’t NT the Northern Territory of South Australia for a bit?
Is the grey part Aboriginal land?
New South Wales was never even that southern
[https://youtu.be/dOBhf8f7cXM?si=4Olu-8dF-aLAOTSD&t=130](https://youtu.be/dOBhf8f7cXM?si=4Olu-8dF-aLAOTSD&t=130)
So in an alternate timeline Australia could have just been called New South Wales
And they still messed up the borders
Australia is such an iconic continent
You're missing [Central Australia](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_Australia_(territory)), which existed from 1927-1931. 

I believe this is what led to the [Great Emu War](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emu_War) one year later.
I think New South Wales has had enough of a kicking.

Said no Victorian ever.
Didn't know this. Always good to learn
We need Westralia to happen so the map can get changed again
1825 was a good year.
In case you didn't know,  the original NSW border is on the Treaty of Tordesillas line, which is an earlier agreement to divide the world in two.
meanwhile in victoria 3...
Great map on how you colonized Australia 🤣. First nations land always will be
What's the difference between 1859 and after 1911? Am I missing something?

EDIT: Ok I am dyslexic, I see it
Where is NSW?

THAT'S IN QUEENSLAND

Queensland Everywhere!
Fun fact... that eastern border of SA is not a straight line.
Just need to add one more state by drawing a line along the Tropic of Capricorn from the Pacific Ocean to the QLD/NT boarder. 

I want to be able to leave my job building the Bradfield scheme on a Friday arvo and legally drive my car as fast as it can go to a river bank and so I can shoot a crocodile with a 50 cal semi auto then then set off some celebratory fireworks and only Bob Katter as Premier make it happen.
Perhaps it’s already been said, but I think NZ was in there somewhere at sometime??
Don’t dead open inside
funny how the 2nd northernmost state was recognised as a southern state for over 50 years while everyone else got a name it just sat there
ignoring indigenous populations lmal
Western Australia and east Western Australia u mean
But Mew Sourff Walez is likes va bestest state in like va world aye...so yz day likes changed it 2 lyks a smalla states n shit aye...

Apparently....🙄
ACT erasure 😡
Changes appearance all the time. Australia doesn’t look anything like it did for me originally. We used to be completely surrounded by ocean for one and never had PNG above us. Sooo many changes that happen everyday it’s crazy. “The Great Australian Bight” showed up for me recently
According to the British*
Why did it take 37 years for Western Australia to be a state? Was the western half not part of a colony before then?
Anyone else seeing the 1788 map like the unidentified grey area as the silhouette of a lioness and NSW as the silhouette of a cat vomiting up what is now Tasmania?
Bro half dis country is ours
It’s a little known, made up fact that in 1851 we established our own secret border force to protect our borders and keep eastern invaders at bay. Over time, it morphed into what it is currently known as the Western Australian Dept of Food and Agriculture but back in the day it was a force to be reckoned with. There are still remnants of the border fence we constructed during a secret mission conducted between 1901 - 1907, codenamed “Rabbit Proof”. There was a 2002 documentary about it if you want to know more.
Albany was a military outpost of NSW from 1826-1831, it’s a footnote in the history of colonisation, but interesting in understanding how the settlements progressed. It was a whaler/sealer outpost for ~5 years before that.
It just proves nobody has ever given a shit about Western Australia.
We're still waiting.
Watching.
Preparing.


The West will rise!
And there's an allowance in the constitution if they want to join the federation :)
Pretty sure it still is when they're picking state of origin sides.
At the rate Greater Sydney is growing, we'll have it back soon
Bring em back into the fold ༼ つ ◕_◕ ༽つ we need rugby players
New Zealand used to be the closest country to ours and it never had its own Tassie either which is called “Stuart Island” well they changed the spelling to “Stewart” recently but when I first saw that island show up on google earth a few months back the name was definitely spelt “Stuart”
Indeed that’s where the “northern territory (of south australia” got its name in the first place!

Wikipedia has the full gif
Came here to say this 😄
Centralia!
I knew that Central Australia existed, but hadn't actually looked into it, was going to make a joke about how it would've held like 5 people at its peak but instead was confronted with this blight of a man after going down a bit of a rabbithole:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_George_Murray

Jesus Christ.
came here to say this :)
This got me lmao
r/mapswithoutnewzealand
Officially it was very brief, only lasting [a few years between 1839 and 1841](https://www.nma.gov.au/defining-moments/resources/new-zealand-becomes-a-separate-colony), since before that the exact relationship wasn't clearly defined.
History is fascinating
Any association to the U2 song?

Edit: yes

“Songfacts®:

This song is about John Boyle O’Reilly, the leader of an 1864 Irish uprising after the Great Famine. He was banished to Australia for rebelling against the government.
Van Dieman’s Land is the former name for the Australian state of Tasmania. British convicts were sent there for committing crimes and forced to live in the dirty jail cells there.”

(Source: https://www.songfacts.com/facts/u2/van-diemens-land)
How is it wrong? The label Tasmania doesn't appear until 1859. I think they just didnt want to squeeze the label Van Diemans Land in, so its more incomplete than wrong.
According to Wikipedia it was part of NSW until 1825 when it became a separate colony and its name changed to Tasmania.
Nobody got it
Today no longer exists and it was formed in recent times ie 1960s 1970s ATO rubbed it's hand when king Leonard passed away few years ago sons made deal and sold the farm
and The Principality of Snake Hill and a bunch of other micronations
Northern Territory
> Where is the ACT?

I think the answer to that is "who cares?"

;)
And Jervis Bay Territory.
and ACT.
Guessing really stems from NSW being too big at the time to efficiently manage the whole area… eg 
- South Australia created for migrants not convicts
- Queensland separated when they gained their own economic significance
So each and every aussie had interstate groups to hang shit on during footy season.
New colonies and settlements were set up besides Sydney. These are the 6 state capital cities today.
Basically the creation of new colonies.  South Australia was proclaimed in 1836; until then, its territory was basically uninhabited by Europeans.  Before modern technology, not a lot of the border between NSW/Vic and SA was easily passable, either because it was barren desert or because there's a largish mountain range in the way.  So organic growth from the Eastern states was minimal and SA was instead settled by new colonialists from England (largely economic migrants as no convicts were sent there).
for a while each new town that got settled got its own state. hobart, melbourne, perth, brisbane etc then they realised that was getting a bit silly.
Only for 511 days: between 6 February 1840 to 1 July 1841.
1863 - 1911 was part of SA. And briefly in 1846 was a colony in its own right. But that’s ok-it was all stolen.
It was a dedicated early project that intended to create a new colony in the area, not for the purpose of being a penal colony like Botany Bay (Sydney) but initially a bit of a private venture focused on free British emigration. So it became a polity before British settlement in the area as part of a planned colonial project. Victoria on the other hand was separating an already colonized and established part of NSW into a separate political entity.
[deleted]
It’s south of the original Wales 🏴󠁧󠁢󠁷󠁬󠁳󠁿
Which state are you talking about?
Why the downvotes? Does the truth hurt?
Basically in land and wealth too lol
Ah yes classic WA thinking they are the only thing going in this country. You only contribute 17.5% of the national GDP. Sit back down. There’s more to life than letting multinationals dig stuff out of the ground for piss all tax gain for Australia.
That’s because there’s an outstanding natural harbour at Albany and in the days of sailing ships it was a key location for European shipping. An enemy taking Albany would control the sea lanes between Europe and eastern states.
Northern Territory even worse, it was offered to both sa and qld. They both didn't want it
I find this sad because I find Perth to be up there with Melbourne and Sydney, in terms of “presence” and culture within the city. I’d rank it third behind Syd and Mel, above Brisbane even.
Until it threatens to actually leave lol
As far away from those Sydney wankers as you can get!
Why are we prevented from seceding the baggage over east then?
you think that is bad? according to the map, Tasmania only got given a name after 1859. it was not NSW after 1825 but seems like none thought it deserved a name for more than three decades
We shall take New Zealand by force and rename it New New South Wales.
That’s why we have a suburb in Canberra called Manuka
New Zealand? That’s in Queensland!
“Stuart Island” used to be called south island. 
 
“South Island” used to be called middle island. 

“North Island” was always north island?
What kind of cooker nonsense is this?
"The Board of Inquiry which ran from late December 1928 until the end of January 1929 was a [whitewash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitewashing_(censorship)) set up to protect Murray and the colonial system in the Northern Territory. The board found that Murray and the other perpetrators of the massacres acted in self defence and that the shootings were justified. It found that the Aboriginals themselves were to blame and that more police patrols would be required to instil control upon the surviving Indigenous population. The board suggested that Murray should have more police training but this was never done.[^(\[1\])](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_George_Murray#cite_note-Bradley-1)"

  
Inb4 it was a long time ago, they should stop complaining, they don't need any damn voice to parliament, colonisation was the best thing that ever happened to them, they couldn't even invent the wheel

miss anything?
Yes I feel sad for Central Australia, often missed but not forgotten. It is to Australian historical maps what New Zealand is to world maps.
indeed. still spins out my NZ counterparts when raised. 

still have to apologise for the underarm, however.
Hold me now,  
Oh hold me now  
'Til this hour  
Has gone around  
And I'm gone  
On the rising tide  
For to face  
Van Diemen's land  
It's a bitter pill  
I swallow here  
To be rent from one so dear  
We fought for justice  
And not for gain  
But the magistrate  
Sent me away  
Now kings will rule  
And the poor will toil  
And tear their hands  
As they tear the soil  
But a day will come  
In this dawning age  
When an honest man  
Sees an honest wage  
Hold me now  
Oh hold me now  
'Til this hour  
Has gone around  
 And I'm gone  
On the rising tide  
For to face Van Diemen's land

>But a day will come
In this dawning age
When an honest man
Sees an honest wage - U2 1988


that day cant come soon enough
Only New Guinea cares. Until they saw this map, now they are more angry
Just read the wiki and they folded in 2020 just before the pandemic which is a shame because they were just about to become relevant to cookers and would have given us hours of entertainment
Skateboarders.
Well we’re big enough now. Time for a civil war to take back what’s ours… except Victoria and Tas. Too cold, too wet.
Hence why they still have a weird accent
NT, sorry
Basically because the minerals by luck happen to fall within WA borders. And people from other states set up companies to dig out the stuff from the ground in the WA borders to sell to China.
God forbid the French got to it! Australia’s early history would have been nuts if the colonial powers set their minds to tearing the continent apart.
Maybe WA should have been offered. Be even more of a monster state.
Fuck, why would we ever give up prime deals on more desert?
This selection of maps misses the four years when the Northern Territory was split into North Australia and Central Australia 

"Although separation took effect in February 1927, within four years the Act was repealed. On 12 June 1931, North Australia and Central Australia were reunited as the Northern Territory."

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_Australia_(territory)
Can't blame 'em
As someone from Perth and has spent a fair amount of time in Melbourne. Dawg what Perth is an absolute shit hole and the only culture Perth has is culture kings
Lol get off the pipe son.
Yeah then they realise they would have to find somewhere else to loot GST cash from!
Newest Southest Wales or no deal
3 day special operation to take NZ, what can go wrong??
New South New South Wales.
bro i would be okay with that... then we can get proper cheese twisties in aussie supermarkets.
New South Zealand
[It's already being planned.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7xUYbI64QHI)
[deleted]
As a Kiwi please invade us ASAP
Don't need force. A lot of NZers are already coming into Aus in droves. Heck, it'd be a welcome change for NZ to be part of aus again!
That’s silly, everyone knows it’s named after the honey
That's why we have a suburb in Wellington called 
Nōwhukenwae.
The suburb is actually Griffith. Manuka is an area within it.  
Like Woden, which is in Phillip. 

Yes, I’m that guy. I’ll see myself out.

Edit: fun fact I just remembered: apparently the area of Manuka is pronounced the way it is because the queen pronounced it wrong when she opened it (or something like that) and everyone was too polite to correct her.
Had\*. Technically the shops are in Griffith now.
As I said it only showed up for me recently. It was never there before in my previous timeline NZ never had anything under it. My adoptive mum is from there, I’ve been going there since I was a baby and lived there for 2 years. Seen it on many maps thousands of times and never once heard of this island or seen it on any map so I wouldn’t have a clue of the history. When it showed up on google earth months ago the name was definitely “Stuart”’but now it’s spelt “Stewart”
NZ was only one connected island and not separated into two parts for me. The entire shape of it has changed pretty drastically and it’s a lot further away from Australia than before when it was closer in. Used to take me only 2 hours from Sydney to get there by plane.
Wtf are you talking about? It’s not nonsense. Moron
How Aboriginal are they anyway?


To be perfectly clear, this is not my opinion, but an answer to your question. Just in case someone attacks me ...
\#neverforget
Honestly, probably for the best of the family's sanity they dodged that bullet.
I mean, some of the gold, the titanium, bauxite, and the lithium mines are all within an couple hours drive of Perth, so WA would be a mining state even without the Pilbara and Eastern Deserts. WA's one coal mining location is too, but that's not exported.
Just how it’s luck that QLD has tropical cities and islands and the Great Barrier Reef. A lot of destinations have natural attractions and advantages, so I wouldn’t scoff at it or use those facts to throw shade. NSW is the financial hub of Australia because it’s the oldest colony and that’s where the first fleet set up shop — and that’s where our economy was born.

If anything, the ASX and financial hub of Australia could be anywhere.
I can’t hear you over all of our sweet, sweet GST $$$
Nationalise the rocks I say
Snooze ya loose - get your own massive state
Why doesn't WA, the largest state, simply eat the other states?
I’m saying this as someone who doesn’t live in Melbourne or Perth, but visit both regularly. I won’t argue with someone who lives there, though, as I’m from Adelaide and am fairly critical of this place too lol
Brand Spankin South Wales
Yea and we can bring out old maps to show it was part of New South Wales at one point to justify it.
They’ll have a South of the South Island too right?
New South East New South Wales.
Might end up worse off.
I love this comment because only a kiwi would understand it hahaha
I've gone down this rabbit hole before.

The Queen story is a fun urban legend, but likely not ture, while she did visit Manuka it's doubtful she ever said it:

Article 1:
https://www.abc.net.au/news/specials/curious-canberra/2016-07-25/why-do-canberrans-pronounce-manuka-differently/7637470?utm_campaign=abc_news_web&utm_content=link&utm_medium=content_shared&utm_source=abc_news_web

Article 2:
https://the-riotact.com/the-surprising-reason-this-iconic-canberra-suburb-has-a-maori-name/587624

And Maori language actually places the stress on the first A, meaning the Canberra pronunciation is actually closer than Ma-Nuka.


Video:
https://youtu.be/lo5u31x4yjg?si=I1MReiXHn9s5Hv3p
[Griffith, you say?](https://preview.redd.it/why-are-guts-angry-face-always-drawn-in-the-most-artistic-v0-r9a3dnp1i6x91.png?width=640&crop=smart&auto=webp&s=2fcd05e7d1e650423a90049efa7c833d8a6bfb69)
>Like Woden, which is in Phillip.

Actually, Phillip is in Woden. Phillip is a suburb in the district of Woden \[Valley\].
I can tell you're lying because New Zealand is never on maps. r/mapswithoutnz
Get help
Yeah, that's a classic too. "Ummm we diluted their heritage by forcefully causing them to intermix with the white population therefore they're white therefore they don't get to whinge anymore."
It’s why I’m glad the Ryals in Ballarat never ACTUALLY got their shit together enough to make their castle a sovereign state BS like they wanted to. It was cooked enough.
No, no, don't bring logic into this. Just say something like the northern part of WA should break off and call itself 'Southeast Dakota' just to mess with people.  

Messing with cartographers for fun and profit.
To your point about financial hubs - if Australia ends up fully orienting itself toward Asia - it would be only a matter of time before its financial hubs move to WA as well. Namely Perth Metro. Or at least satellite hubs.
States own the rocks, have a referendum. Good luck.
Because there was a typo and Australia is now full of desert, not dessert.
Pokies lobby and Transurban keep preventing it probably
we are merciful
Perhaps they are saving that for sweeps.
Why do you think MOST of our armed forces aren't in WA - and some of those who are, are the ones who do sneaky behind the lines stuff
So long as we send the emus in first and not last.
I’ve read Nofuckingway written in local accent from many places
It doesn’t take a rocket surgeon to understand that one.
Wrong
Well ok then. I’ll take your word for it…

And your cited sources too I guess 😂
Well yeah, kinda. Woden Valley is the area, within which one of the suburbs is Phillip, within which is Woden centre. It’s actually kinda funny.

The word Woden is such a weird word. Say it over and over. It’s fkn odd man.
I looked at NZ on many maps dude I ain’t lying at all. That was the situation. Considering my adoptive mum is from there we got shown NZ on maps as kids tonnes of times especially when planing to go there. I also used to see it on maps outside of travel agents and would stop to look at our country and NZ often. I know what NZ used to look like mate, I can see it in my head right now and it ain’t anything like the current situation. Clearly you were just never paying attention therefore you can’t remember how it used to look. Try looking into geographical Mandela effects cause it sounds like you’re hotly ignorant. Lots of people remember Australia and NZ looking the same way I do and that’s because they did look different. Reality isn’t solid mate grow up and get over it
I think what you meant to say is you’re too emotionally immature to handle the truth so you want me to be lying because you want “reality” to be “real” which tells me you’re also uneducated on Quantum physics. Try doing some research and pay attention to your surroundings for a change. Hope that helps.
I think you’re the one who needs help buddy. Clearly ignorant of modern physics. Get educated.
This guy get it..
Proposals for Far North Queensland have been around for a while. Perhaps something  similar might help.
Its already fully oriented towards Asia

The stock market still opens at 7am in summer
Given our obesity problems, it’s probably for the best.
send in the airborne!
Our marines
 🇳🇴
I meant the pronounciation of how he has written it. 99% of foreigners mispronounce Maori words with 'wh'.
The bar lowers when you cross the Tasman
If you were a kiwi you would agree with my first comment. Foreigners are notorious in New Zealand for mispronouncing Maori words, especially those with 'wh' but congratulations for figuring it out all on your own.
Don't need modern physics to explain memory lapses.
Not geopolitically it's not.
Is that the sugar gliders?
Distract them with the cuteness while the emus land ashore?
Maybe a few cassowaries mixed in as well.
It’s actually pretty easy to remember how things used to be and this is how you do it. Look at our country right now and remember. Get it stuck in your brain and then wait for it to change and then when it does you’ll remember how it used to look. Maybe your memory is shit but I typically only have to look at something once or twice and I’ve got it there. Hope that helps.
