Fucked myself by not reading the fine print here, but their refunds are  sorted through a UK company called Booking Protect. Grandma died not too long ago, wanted to get out of town for a night, saw Ride was playing in a few weeks (for all the TikTok zoomers who apparently now love Slowdive and MBV, go listen to Nowhere and Going Blank Again, great albums), went "ah yeah that should be an alright enough time", now come the past few days and I've gotten a really fucking nasty cold. 

Not sure if it's COVID, all the tests we have at home are either expired or given away recently, but anyway, point is I know it'd be unfair to the friend I was planning on staying with, anybody on public transport and whoever's at the venue, I'd almost certainly get them sick with this garbage. Thought I paid for the option to refund, I'd get to use it without much hassles, nope. I understand some of the proof for some reasons being required, but this shit is absurd.

[Read the reviews](https://www.productreview.com.au/listings/booking-protect). From what I can tell it's pretty much all true. Requiring a DEATH CERTIFICATE to get a $100 refund? And it only applies to immediate family, fuck you if it's a close friend or a missing person (presumed dead) instead? Get the fuck outta here 🙋. 

Anyway, I'm sure somebody here's gonna call me a dumb poopoo head for not thinking hard enough when buying a ticket, and I guess this is a lesson for next time, but I'm starting to understand why people buy tickets so late now. God bless our own consumer laws and fuck the companies from other countries that try and run around them. Is there anything I can do here outside of trying to get a note from my local doctor's (which takes about a couple of weeks to schedule an appointment at the best of times) saying that I'm crook as shit and hoping for the best? Gonna see if any of my Adelaide mates want the ticket, I guess.
Sell it on tixel
Solid rant. But that’s always been the risk with concert tickets, if you can’t go, you gotta give the ticket away or sell it on to someone else. 

Why would you be entitled to anything because you’re sick and can’t go?

You bought an insurance product without reading the terms and then whinge that it doesn’t actually cover much. Welcome to the real world of insurance companies.
Cant you get an online doc certificate
Sorry mate, but the terms and conditions of their "Secure Ticket" policy seems pretty cut and dry. Doctors certificate indicating you have an illness that would prevent you from attending a concert.
Sell it
You can get a medical certificate from a lot of pharmacies 
In many industries, this would be considered "Junk insurance" and would be completely illegal. Its just that we dont tend to police the ticketing industry all that well.
