Saw this cute Waitrose billboard and wanted to let any Aussies in the UK know they no longer need a case dedicated to Tim Tams when travelling back here…Tim Tam slam away my friends 🫶 
‘G’Daytrose’ might be the worst play on words I’ve ever read.
Pity they’ve changed the recipe, they aren’t anywhere near as good now. Too sweet and not rich enough. I’m moving on (and upset about it)
Of course it’s Clapham, little Australasia 😂
[removed]
What g'daytrose mean?
I would have loved that when I was living in the UK for 10 years. When I visited Germany they sold a knock off of twisties, which made me crave them more. I missed Cottees lime cordial, smooth flowing peppermint chocolate , Paul’s custard and Aussie bbq sauce ( they like Smokey bbq) but managed to eventually find a sweeter one.
Tesco have also started selling Tim Tams the last few weeks. So keep your eyes peeled there as well.
Bloody legend. Currently in Bath and have a hankering for a timtam slam
Back around 2005 when I lived in London you could easily buy Tim Tams at some of the bigger Sainsburys stores.
It's an ad
Our finest export.
Do they have FUIC?
Am I the only person who has no interest in eating Australian food when I'm overseas? Like I've had plenty of Tim Tams and Vegemite in my life, I didn't go halfway across the world to keep doing the same thing. Give me whatever the locals are doing well. That being said, I haven't been to the UK so if the reputation as to the quality of their food is accurate then maybe Tim Tams are the only edible option.
How many fascists can I punch on the way to get my Tim tams
the brits better have vegimite
That great! What’s the going price?
An American biscuit, in the UK, pretending to be Australian
People haven’t shut the fuck about this for months over here. I don’t really get why everyone loses their shit over snack foods. If a shop has shapes it’s all over Aussies In London on Facebook.
It made it hard to read further
Sometimes less is more.. “Gday Aussies of Clapham” would’ve been infinitely better
I don't even get it?
Definitely written by a Kiwi
WTAF GayRose the Choctaw bikkie? Crazy poms
I think that makes it better
Makes you wonder what rainbow washing slogans they use during Pride Month :D
G’Daytrose sounds like a word I’d get a written warning at work for…
I knew it was from Waitrose as soon as I saw that "word".

Must be a UK knowledge and bad joke appreciation c- c- combo.
I'm gonna boycott Waitrose now.
Same, I've converted to Penguin.
Have you tried the Aldi knockoffs?  What's your opinion?
For some reason ever since the change, the taste of them makes me feel really sick? Like a bad tasting medicine stuck at the back of my throat

I feel like it’s something to do with the caramel but I’m not sure (I used to love eating Tim tams)
I got some the other day and gave them to my partner. They were way too vanilla-y.
We'd gift folks we visit in the UK with TimTams but won't now after the reformulation. They have enough crap chocolate there already.
Are you sure that the recipe has changed? What evidence do you have?

They were never rich and always sweet for me.

That's why I love the dark Tim Tam's, the perfect balance of chocolate and sweetness.
Literally 😂😂 I remember visiting my friend from Aus in London. Living in a share house with 5 Aussies in Clapham .. classic !
You can just do r/ then the name of the sub

r/hailcorporate
Don't know why the sub can't ban these types of posts
This billboard 100% tracked OP using their phone MAC address and served up the most relevant ad. 

But ooooooh yummy Tim tams!
Waitrose is the name of the store. Gday is a typical Australian greeting. Tim tams come from Australia.
We were in South America at the end of last year and the knock off Snickers was just wrong. I barely  even buy them here but had a craving for some reason. A big disappointment!
I'd recommended milk instead
No longer.
You know London is like the largest community of Australian expats right? As in Australians that live outside Australia?

It's always nice to have treats from home when you live abroad.
You do realise some of us live here and work for extended periods right?

I grew up in Melbourne so am aware of it's great food and restaurant scene.  Trust me, London has so much more available authentic food from around the world.  

So some of us like a taste from home occasionally.  Tim Tams are one.  I also pick up a lamington sometimes from the Blackbird bakery in Balham - equal or better than the ones I grew up with in Oz. Many aussies running australian style coffee/bakery places here.

My wife is Japanese - we probably order Japanese couple of times a month.  Should I disown her for this?
Not everyone wants Australian food all the time while they're away. I was in Japan for 3 weeks on a holiday once, completely happy to eat the food available there, but about 2 weeks in I experienced homesickness that manifested itself as a strong desire for a sausage sandwich.

The problem, however, was finding actual beef sausages...
How long did you live abroad? I’d say around the 2-3 year mark you do get cravings for some stuff that you can only buy in Australia.
Tesco have it. Thankgod
We have, but it's not as good as marmite... sorry
It’s Waitrose, so it’ll have Waitrose tax on top of the RRP.
An American company buying the Australian company that created Tim Tams doesn't make Tim Tams an American biscuit though
Yeah nah, it's an Australian biscuit. That's just like calling Milo a Swiss product because it's owned by Nestle
Let people have things, does it adversely affect your life if they get excited about home snacks half the world away?
I too get upset when people care about things I don't care about.
It's not really about the direct sensory experience of eating the food. It's an opportunity to share excitement about something with a group you identify with. It's a chance to indulge in nostalgia.

Speculation: You have chosen to instead affirm your identity as a realist.
Yep. I stumbled on that word a few times and didn't even bother with the rest.
gday clapham would communicate it even more succinctly.
Gday and Waitrose (the supermarket advertising this) combined.
Kiwi dad*
G’day Pride 
Yeah I lived in the UK for a few years and it made sense in my head straight away. But "Waitrose" is a name with significance in my head so I guess I'm gonna connect the dots.
Penguins are superior and I'm not afraid to say it. The mint and orange ones have always been god tier biscuits.
My parents have those all the time. 

Not as good as original TimTams, IMO, but they're ok.

I'll probably not bother with either from now on.
Kids loudly complained cos, you know, different name, packaging, etc, then quietly converted cos, you know, they're better.
I assume they have switched to American vomit chocolate
Million of people complaining about it on this sub over the last 6 months is all you need for evidence mate.

Unless all of us collectively altered our tastebuds of late.

I'm moving on from TimTams. They are no longer Australian owned, and the new parent company has ruined them.
I agree I want to see evidence too


I do know that the cocoa harvest in Ghana and PNG was dismal this year due to climate change so it wouldn't surprise me
Fixed. I knew that but did a lazy cut and paste instead...
Nothing more Australian that Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company Incorporated!
After about 2 years you really start missing pub parmis
I am ready for the downvotes, but Vegemite has an after-taste of carrot vomit.  Marmite is supreme
They're playing into the homesickness angle, they need to call out the Aussies somehow.
Oh haha. I was looking for some weird British slang in it.

Yeah, that's also stupid though.
The fonts and colours do the heavy lifting here. It’s instantly recognisable when you see these stores every day.

Still, could have been:  
“C*nts miss straya? Get ya slam on!”  

And they’d sell out to every Clapham resident day 1
I was thinking Gaytrose but that too
No, just ramped the sugar and stinged on the chocolate.

I think I've eaten my last ever TT..
Millions?

I've seen dozens.

Our tastebuds and preferences change as we get older.

Anyway I'm not saying that it isn't true, I just want some evidence.

Personally I haven't noticed any difference but the original was never my favourite so I'm not a reliable connessiour of it.
> Unless all of us collectively altered our tastebuds of late.

I mean yeah, thats definitely possible. As people get older they become less tolerant of a lot of sweet foods, and lose sensitivity to other flavours. Findings something to become 'more sweet and less rich' is exactly what you'd expect an ageing group of people to say. I'm in my 30s and I find pure orange juice too sweet to drink anymore, but it isnt a Big Orange conspiracy, I'm just getting older.
It's due to a cocoa disease and the crops being too close together.

Monocultures are ripe for diseases.

https://www.snackandbakery.com/articles/111698-81-of-ghana-cocoa-region-plagued-with-bean-disease#:~:text=Ghana%20is%20infected%20with%20Cocoa%20Swollen%20Shoot%20Disease.&text=The%20International%20Cocoa%20Organization%20its,Swollen%20Shoot%20Disease%20(CSSVD).
Have you tried the UK "parmo"? Although it seems to be missing the tomato sauce so it's probably a shadow of the real thing. Makes me think someone needs to open a parmi joint in Clapham.
*parma
A rightfully deserved downvote
"Oi, mad cunts of Clapham"
They went hard on palm oil, or away from palm oil.  Not sure which
If it was gradual, sure.
I've seen what you like, your boos mean nothing to me!
“Oi sick cunt”
I haven't heard a million people saying their was a sudden change all at the same time exclusively. I've seen people complaining about changes in recipes in this subreddit for a decade.

https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/flsh13/timtam_recipe_change/

Here's one claiming the TimTam recipe changed from 4 years ago
