
Kind of random but I saw on Twitter and tiktok that there’s a rivalry between the US and aussies for medals in swimming. Except it’s only Americans saying it’s not a rivalry, not sure if I’m missing the original posts. Do you all find this to be real?
Yeah, the girls!
We're still in front of the Poms. That's all that matters.
I count 9/34 medals solely credited to men and just two golds (50 m freestyle and Tennis Doubles). Not to disparage the men, but the women definitely carry us.
Is this one of our worst rowing performances in a while? Not to discredit the athletes or their performance
Australia are the only country to really push USA for gold. Australia have always gotten 2nd on the swimming medal tally even when it was "bad" years for Australia like in Rio it was 3 gold.

But last Olympics and this Olympics, the level of USA has dropped instead of their 15+ gold they're getting like 9 or 11 while Australia are getting 2 fewer. 

But, if you do look at the medal tally, Australia and USA are kinda the only ones that aren't only "carried" by one swimmer. France's 4 was Marchand, Canada's 3 was all McIntosh, China's 2 was Pan. So also from that perspective, the rivalry exists there in the fact that it's not solely one swimmer vs USA it's Australia vs USA
Generally the yanks are our biggest rivals in the pool. Would be very American for them to dismiss our achievements and how close we pushed them on the medal tally in the pool. The Chinese, French and brits all pop up in different events though.
Well, that is disapraging the men. What about when men got the most medals. Was that 'carrying' the women?
Woman have less competition. A lot of countries don't let women do sports and a lot more spend most of the cash on the men's teams  mostly . Australia sports cash at Olympic level is pretty even
Chinas catching up fast, every Olympics they are getting better and better in swimming, to the point now they are taking what could have been Gold and Silver medals for Australia...

Australia is getting worse and worse every Olympics in swimming because we are not investing in our younger generation.
Fair; is it an every Olympics or just this Olympics rivalry?
To be fair, it'd probably be less about celebrating the men and more about "how are we as a society failing the women?" if the roles were reversed and going to extra lengths to achieve equality. The gender bias is there, even though I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing to celebrate a strong women's team.

As the other commenter says, it's probably indicative of a successful women's program that's ahead of the rest of the world rather than a failing men's program. The men's tally is about in line with what would be reasonably expected for a country of our population and wealth, with the women over-achieving massively.
The yanks are still in denial that we beat them in the mens relay in 2000
We’ve been 1 & 2 pretty much every Olympics since 2000 on the medal tally in the pool. Let’s not forget it’s a bit of David Vs Goliath situation as well.
We also need to look at how society is failing men. Suicide and death from preventable diseases is atrocious. In a sporting context, saying the women are carrying the team is appaling. Ive heard these sentiments repeated by broadcasters on tv. This kind of language isnt excused because of disadvantage women face.
Yeah, we took Gary Hall Jr's boast to heart and smashed them like guitars.
Chinas catching up fast, every single Olympics now that they have put aome focus into swimming.
For someone that seems to care about mental health, you seem fine attacking the performance of a woman breakdancing.

Do you think the way you discuss her performance could impact her mental health?
