
Half a year ago someone on this sub posted an article showing how many investment properties MPs had. There were a handful of "property managers" with a portfolio of 10+ properties. There were a handful with no investment properties. But something like 80% of MPs had 1-3 investment properties, AKA "mum & dad investors", as shit as that term is.

MPs are not going to introduce laws that make themselves worse off financially.
Been saying it for the last decade, while everyone like "nah it'll get better!", "You just have to work harder"



Why? Why are people so obsessed with propping up apathetic fantasy?


Why would anything EVER change while it's vastly benefitting the policy makers and their friends?


It's also not stagnant, it's a TREND.


Wealth inequality is GROWING in australia.
Not slowing, not stopping, not reversing.
It is actively getting worse without end because of leacherous policy.
~60% of voters are also homeowners who would revolt if their houses fell in value. 

The cold calculus of democracy ensures that house prices can’t be allowed to fall.
For a start, if CPI was tied to the cost of accommodation the government would do something about the price increases. If they were forced to increase pensions and public employee wage increases in line with accommodation costs they would put the breaks on the housing market.
The sad thing is we don't even need to crash the housing market to do this. 

Singapore has a two-tiered housing market. If you want cheap housing you buy a HDB flat and accept some restrictions that come with it. But if you want, you can buy a private condo or even a house from a private developer and do whatever you want with it. Plenty of people do, and they're not cheap - especially landed property which is insanely expensive.

There's no reason why we couldn't do the exact same thing. Also ban people using them for rentals or BnBs, and even look at ideas like selling them on a lease (say 50-70 years) so ownership reverts to the government when the owners die.
[deleted]
Australia has too much wealth tied up in the housing market. Because we don’t really produce anything, you’ll tank the economy with anything too drastic.
They won't fix the problem because if you do crash the housing market in Australia you'll crash the economy along with it and hundreds of thousands of people will lose their jobs and businesses and you'll be unelectable for a decade or so. So they just keep the migration levels high to keep the prices high and wages surpressed because it's an easy way to keep the economy from crashing. Politicians are either corrupt or pragmatic in Australia. They certainly aren't brave or adventurous enough to try and recreate the system to work better for the people. They play politics with very little risk. Australians love to claim they want change. But in reality they're scared of change and will vote against anyone who offers significant change.
There's one political party that Labor really hates that was proposing policy that would lower house prices, free up rental stock for purchasing, and otherwise make housing more affordable, but Labor poo-pooed them right out of the gate.
Because we keep voting sociopaths into power. I can not think of a single politician that gives a shit about the people they are supposed to represent. They care about their own wallets. But we the people are stupid and will contine to vote for LibLab. Until these two major parties become minor parties we will continue to have crisis after crisis after crisis. Lower and Middle class will be robbed until there is nothing to rob.
The great divide. No changing it now. the have’s will have and the not’s will not. Not just housing is broken in Australia, Australia is broken entirely.
To do that we have to define what the crises is and the root cause. The rental crisis could have very different causes to housing affordability, or they could share synergetic or deconstructive factors. There's alot of articles blaming everything from CGT to immigration and everything inbetween, but I have not seen any comprehensive studies on the topic. 
We recently moved into a new rental property. It's a brand new house that's just been finished, and the owners, while nice and happy to help us with anything we need, are using it as an investment property. There's houses going up everywhere in this new estate and almost all of the new ones that are just finished have a 'for lease' sign. 

I looked at a house and land package but the prices are ridiculous, and buying an older house is cheaper but then you have to pay over what it's worth just to win at an auction.
Total fail. The government has been sleepwalking into this.

https://theconversation.com/the-housing-crisis-hit-queensland-hard-jolted-into-action-the-state-has-raised-its-game-230870

> Brisbane property prices have climbed by 65% since the pandemic began. That’s almost double the Australian capital city average (34%). 

> Since COVID hit in 2020, Queensland’s population has grown by 6.6%, compared with 4.7% for Australia as a whole.

> This is a sector in long-term decline across Australia. Investment has been minimal since the 1990s. By 2021, **social housing was down to barely 3% of all occupied dwellings in Queensland.**

I also saw a report on banking in  Germany and the Netherlands. They have thousands of community banks and the emphasis is on providing housing rather than profits. Australia has copied the USA and its completely wack.

And its also ridiculous that 80% of the population live on 1% of the continent.
Thinking about moving overseas
Not disagreeing with everything in the video - but I'm extremely skeptical of any Australian comparisons with Singapore. 

  
1. Singaporeans own their flats (HDB's) in a different sense than what we consider ownership here. The HDB's are technically leased to the owners for 99-years (so someone could sell their place midway through the lease, meaning that property values can vary depending on how close to the expiry of the lease it is) 

2. IIIRC, you have to 'queue' up to buy newly built HDB's (I think they're called Built To Orders or BTOs), but social factors such as whether you're married (or in a relationship) vs being single affect what you're allowed to buy - it's socially significant as I hear from my singaporean friends that this policy encourages couples to get married early. 

3. There are racial quotas (that's right!) for the sale of these HDB's i.e., a certain percentage of the flats must be owned by indians, a certain percentage for the Chinese etc. 

  
I hope that these 3 examples show how Singapore's economic policies are often intermingled with their social policies -- the Singaporean government has incredible amount of control over the daily lives of their citizens. And a majority of them are agreeable to it.

  
I highly doubt that most Australians would tolerate this level of government intervention, especially since the Australian lifestyle significantly prizes individual liberties over that of the Singaporean state. The fact that NIMBY-ism is such a big problem here already highlights the problem with social housing as a large-scale solution. The fact that the 'Australian Dream' is very specific to landed property is also another reason why social housing will be unpopular here since no one seems like want to accept living in an apartment for life. 

So no, I don't think the solution is simple despite agreeing that there's too much vested interest amongst policymakers.
Housing is the only investment politicians can have

That’s it. That is the reason why.
It’s literally a government created crisis. One that neither major party have any intention whatsoever to address. 

There isn’t a chance in hell it will get fixed. And if people think things are shit now just wait another 5-10 years. 

Mass immigration fucked up the country and didn’t fix any issues it’s purported to address. Except keep wages suppressed for business
you guys allow this country to be run by scammers.

go Australians !
At this point wouldn't it just be better to leave this country and let the masters deal with the bullshit of their own making? Buy some dirt cheap house overseas and screw the people that cause this mess.
Most of the newer properties being built by Singaporean government and offered for "sale" are actually 99 year leases.  Government gets it back after that.
He didn't even mention businesses and trust's hoovering up all properties...
Fuckin' give us some land and a pile of shipping containers and let us sort it out. It ain't hard.
[more tax cuts for foreign investors ](https://youtu.be/fJGqdthClRs?si=ECNVq-3-hWQ6Mrs2)

I think they are desperate to keep the buble alive and know that only tons of foreign money can keep the market going at this insane rate. 

Forget about releasing land and selling cheap to citizens, or building and selling cheap like Singapore did. Nope.. we need "build to rent" target at "foreign investors" 

At a time when Australians are going homeless, you know who the government will look after. It's shocking to me how many people still believe that lib/lab aren't just complete scum at this point who honestly couldn't care less about australians and Australia's future. At this rate, the economy will be 100% dead soon.
Easily fixed by the State Governments putting more money into public housing
Yeh, nah, that drone shot of Singapore looked disgusting. I’ll take a hard pass on living in massive apartments like that surrounded by other massive apartments.
Always remember that fat bastard smoking a cigar after sticking it to everyone middle class and under.
And this doesn't count the ones that are owned nominally by family members. Joe Hockey's wife 'owned' a property in Canberra that he 'rented' from her with his parliamentary allowance for Canberra accommodation. She then claimed the 'loss' on the property as a negative gearing.

Thanks', Australian taxpayers!
You’re right but it’s the politicians family members we should look into. Politicians can hide wealth within their families. I think a lot of politicians partners and their kids should be up for scrutiny about how much in property they own. Obviously it’s a conflict of interests to do anything about property pricing in Australia. They system has been rigged for the wealthy and political elites
> MPs are not going to introduce laws that make themselves worse off financially.

Labor were evidently willing to back in 2016 and 2019. I daresay they haven't just up and decided to be selfish in 2022, but rather have opted for political expediency.
Really? They've introduced & passed laws that affected their future defined benefit super incomes.

Bill Shorten's Labor ran on a policy of negative gearing changes - for new applicants only - so yes, there's that, and he lost the unloseable election anyway because ... reasons?
>80% of MPs had 1-3 investment properties, AKA "mum & dad investors", as shit as that term is.

>MPs are not going to introduce laws that make themselves worse off financially.

Not surprised and that's also the same issue elsewhere i.e. New Zealand.

Until we have a true "average" person be in charge, the game will always be stacked to favor well off people.
A solution would be to reduce tax benefits on investment property based on the number owned. 
Pretty sure there will be schemes to get around it but at least it’s something.
Even the Greens own multiple investment properties.
It is not just the mps but also a lof the voters have investment properties...
Do they own 1 - 3 investment properties, or do they own 1 - 3 properties? Because I don't think it is excessive for an MP to own a family home, + a property in their electorate, + an apartment in canberra.
For sure. They act out of self-interest and preassure and agreements from local and foreign donors, that's all. 

Australia's economy could be dead, with 30% unemployed and homeless, and they still wouldn't do anything useful if it meant upsetting their housing economy. And likely will.
I was reading an article a few years back, someone mentioned that 6-8 of the senior boards at the RBA held a combined total wealth of $250,000,000 worth of property. So...
Because the single largest voting demographic vote governments in and out based on this.

If the voter base of Australia are greedy, a representative gov’s duty is to represent them with greedy policies. 

This is how our system works
You have to get voted in to pass legislation and to get voted in you have to appease the largest demographics.

I know Australians won’t ever take responsibility and it’s all the governments fault but our parents and grandparents choose this everytime they voted the liberals into office for nothing more than lower interest rates.
Shh Australians don’t want to take responsibility for being selfish low information voters it’s all labor’s fault.

Ignore every single election in the last 30 years and just blame Albo for not having policies that would guarantee a loss at the last election.
Just have to wait when that ratio tips, it seems to be an eventuality
It is tied to the cost of accommodation - just not for land prices because land is considered an asset
Without the people who get the HDB flats the reduced demand for the private housing causes the collapse if it was implemented correctly.
Answer’s simple- it’s from Asia, so it *must* be a bad idea.

If we could convince a European country to start up an HDB it would be policy here within 5 years.
[deleted]
🌏👩‍🚀👈🧑‍🚀
Gotta say though, anyone claiming there's a simple solution to the rather complex problem of housing might be under estimating it a tad.

Punter has done this a fair bit, a lot of whipping up anger and not a lot of understanding of the actual problems.
The housing market isn't the economy. The economy is the cycle of money, you earn money, you spend money, you pay taxes. Money spent is used to pay wages for someone else who then spends it, and so on. Things start to break down if money stops flowing, if people stop spending or money accumulates somewhere and doesn't move, sound familiar?

Housing has a negative impact on the economy, more so with how it's used for investment and speculation at the moment. You spend money on it and it just sits there, that money is no longer flowing through the economy, it's tied up in an asset. The asset then grows in value and is sold, thus tying up even more money.
One of the worst things you can do to any economy is to have ponzi wealth schemes that involve bricks sitting on dirt.  The smart money should be going into factories that employ people and companies that do research into innovative future wealth making products/services. Once you build a home all it does is sit there and produce paper wealth with little if any future creation of new jobs. Depending on an endless cycle of home building in a world where births have topped out is very short-sighted.
You hit the nail right on the head.



About 2/3 of all the money floating around the country right now in the pockets of households is actually someone's mortgage! Should we have a correction in house prices, that will lead to a direct reduction in the amount of money. This is known as deflation, and we have about a trillion dollars of it to deal with over the next decade as all those loans we have been running the country on come due.

To put it another way, if the banks slow down creating new, bigger loans then every single person is about to take a pay cut simply because there is just less money to pay people with.

Any attempt to fix the cost of housing WILL drive this country into the deepest deflationary recession in a century. Every single person with half a brain and an understanding of the Australian economy knows this. It is the dirty little secret no one talks about. It is the reason the RBA is willing to let inflation run hot instead of hiking rates again. It is the reason the government is not actually building new homes at any scale in spite of a "crisis". It is also the reason we can never, ever, ever, be allowed to have another real recession. The government will literally print money and give it to home buyers rather than have a recession that reduces the amount of new loans.

Thankfully we hit the debt limit in 2019 after we saturated the 30 year loan terms by having everyone who could take out a home loan do so for the last 30 years. Rate cuts got us a few years but we are back at the limit again and even rate cuts are not going to magically create an entire generation of debt free, cashed up young people willing to leverage the next 30 years of their working income. So the recession is happening anyway, and we should all be getting ready.
Very little actual wealth is in housing, at least not enough to tank the economy 

It will tank the portfolios of politicians though. Albo makes a pretty decent penny off rent alone
It's wasted money, it'd be much better if that money flowed into maintace and renovating than just holding property.
Bingo. The apathetic country.
Do you think bill shorten had the right idea?
How many seats do greens need to win at the next election? And do you think they’d have to move right if they ever wanted to actually get into gov?

I hear a lot of pie in the sky thinking from greens without much info on how to win rural voters or boomers?

Greens voters need to understand how a representative democracy works and actually provide a sensible way they’re going to win gov with their perfect policies.
Who? What policies?
This sub will not tolerate any negative talk about Labor. So expect to get downvoted. But you are absolutely correct.
If you're talking about Greens demanding removing NG or increasing CGT it wouldn't make housing cheaper. Housing is an investment simply because there aren't any other better investments in the economy, Howard killed Aussie manufacturing and deregulated a lot of financial products.

You remove NG and now a housing speculator needs to sell the house for a higher price than they did previously to make back the money, as with increasing CGT. We've had NG and CGT for decades and housing was still an investment both before and after.

Labor wasn't ever proposing NG be removed under shorten, it was going to get modified mostly because it was a way for extremely rich people who have huge incomes to get away with not paying any tax. That combined with franking credits they could get money out of the government in a sort of rich person welfare.
All politicians even minor and independents are narcissists. They only care about themselves and how important they feel. Normal people don't really become politicians, same for normal people becoming CEOs or directors of companies. The only way for something to happen that really helps lower/middle class is normal people getting forced to be politicians, like via lottery or some drafting system.
Most politicians serve themselves. They are most commonly people who are unable to run a business, or work their way up the corporate ladder. It gives these types of very average people the status and money they seek without doing anything of note. If they were any good, they’d be high earning professionals or owning successful businesses. 
The go in so they can get an easy corporate job afterwards for doing nothing, and a cushy pension. They always sell out the Australian people for money and always take the paper bags where they can. Corruption runs rampant.
Both sides are the same is just cope for lazy people to pretend they’re engaged.

Labor is much better than liberals when you actually read the policies.
Labor should be criticised of course but the both sides are the same talking point is just cope for people who are low information voters and dont go beyond the surface level.

Liberal NBN vs Labor NBN is a perfect summation of the difference.
Our system created liblab, you vote them out you just get more liblabs until the rules are changed
I don't think that's fair. There are a few politicians that care, like Wilkie, David Pocock and some of the Greens.
Estates can go eat a bag of dicks. This ridiculous urban sprawl that's gobbling up land and nature at the outskirts of every city does nothing more than to exacerbate the housing crisis, make us lazier and unhealthier and force more car dependency on us. We need to build more got quality mixed use medium density, and tons of it, then dissuade investors by an ever increasing amount of tax on additional properties. 

Mince the rich.
I feel you. We've been in our rental for 7 years which is also an investment for our landlords. Thankfully they are nice. It was a brand new build too in a new estate but poorly done. They didn't even vacuum before putting the carpet down. I feel rocks and dirt in some places. Was $150-$200k land + house package. There are currently 700 houses for sale in my area now and trying to sell them for $750k+. I can imagine a lot would be trying to get their investment money. It's fucking ridiculous ... We've had people in to check on things with the house over the years and one guy installing the new smoke alarms mentioned all the houses in our area will either fall apart or need to be torn down in 20 years or so. They aren't built to last. I've seen them put a new roof on rotting wood that's had rain damage for months. It's unfair this is happening and there is no accountability.
>And its also ridiculous that 80% of the population live on 1% of the continent.

The government really should have thought of that before turning the majority of Australia into a barren desert.
Whilst I agree with you to an extent, there are certain policies that Singapore applies that could be useful to Australia.

Anti money laundering laws that impact property, it is very difficult to purchase property in Singapore to use for money laundering. It is ridiculously easy in Australia. 

Buying property through Super(CPF in Singapore) and money going back into the Super when you sell that property.


Investment property caps, anti Air bnb laws etc they make it very difficult to use your property as a pure investment vehicle.
Yep and they keep getting pay rises so they keep buying more properties.

Stop overpaying these unqualified people that are only serving their own interests.
How many people are even going to make it to 99?
Singapore is 14 times smaller than Melbourne and holds roughly the same population.
>Yeh, nah, that drone shot of Singapore looked disgusting

So, you've determined what's it's like to live a high dense urban environment form 20secs of drone footage? 

I guess Singapore isn't the only thing that's dense.
Don't forget that entitled cunt running to claim a baby bonus he didn't need 


Couldn't be a more hypocritical choice to tell Australia the age of entitlement is over. 


What a fucking embarrassment, and the man continues to fail upward
> Joe Hockey


Lifter.
What loss was she claiming?
not just their properties but their businesses too. I would wager there are quite a few companies that just happen to receive generous government contracts
When we scrape the surface, Australia  is no different to corrupt countries like Malaysia, Philippines, Vietnam and all the other SE Asian countries where the political class have rigged the whole economy in their favour while pretending that they have a democracy. 

Democracies that cant feed or house their people while the citizens slide into poverty and a slum. Its very well designed in Australia. A corrupt political monarchy that is supported by the corporate benefactors and the Lords of donations while politicians claim "its all legal and was passed by the parliament in your democracy" The joke is truly on us the Voters! 

And then we expect these people to change the system to be fair, nice  joke!. When we are living in a slum we will talk about how it failed and the hope is the new set of politicians that makes promises to change the system. Much like our Federal Icac that was going to fix all the political class corruption, listen to all that silence, they all must have fainted there is so much corruption!
Labor gets blamed even though the voters of Australia choose this.

We live in a representative democracy and labor need to get into office to do anything.

These videos drive me up the wall acting like labor just don’t want to help, whereas the bitter truth is this is what the majority of Australians choose via their voting habits.

The largest voting block have chosen to sell their children’s future for higher house prices and labor are stuffed if they go against that.
Labor will never say that cause the customer is always right; but blaming labor for this is childish and unproductive.
Shorten lost the "unloseable" election because the Coalition were successfully able to weaponise his alleged undermining of Rudd and Gillard, and went with the "dysfunctional, split" ALP narrative. I'd contend the outcome of that election had little to do with any of the ALP's policies, let alone negative gearing.
> They've introduced & passed laws that affected their future defined benefit super incomes.


That's chips compared to property investment.


Also, I'm guessing that change only applied going forward. So all current accrued benefit under the old scheme is safe.
Negative gearing changes *to tip into consolidated revenue*.

He had no ideas for it, not even to put that money into social housing that might ease the problem.. either way it would have been given back as tax cuts like the $20B per year spendathon earlier this year. Which negative gearing changes wouldn't have covered even a fraction of.
Yeah, but they're also willing to make them less lucrative.
You'd be stupid not to if you can afford it. The test for me is what gets voted for.
No it's more because of bad faith actors in our flawed system that has little to no actual choice.


Between the media, lying politicians and legal bribes australias democratic process was downgraded on a global scale.years ago because of the ability of citizens to enact change decreasing.


When shorten was putting forth policy palmer was allowed to run a smear campaign with disinformation on posters everywhere.


Another election the AEC was so weak one of the parties used their official colours for a campaign, again trying to mislead voters.


Go far enough back into howards time and he started the dismantling of our industry, but he dressed it up by purely suggesting this will be good, similar to how reagonomics has been sold to people they lie about the outcomes.


Right now we have a politician arguing for nuclear, but it's purely a ploy to keep oil/coal around longer and siphon money from a large 30+ year project.


It's people sitting in work sites listening to the radio, that hear the same lie multiple time a day that become convinced of their party. 


It's intentionally turned into a tribalistic culture rather than am individual critical thinking excercise.
This transforms campaigns about actual vision, change and policy into derisive, finger pointing.in-group/out-group BS.


This form of cpainging is benefician to lobbyists and entrenched wealth, it doesn't rely on good policy. It's purely about astroturfing.
It's my favourite thing about our system forcing nearly everyone to vote. I really can just blame society for the stupid things our government does.
I am not saying that the politicians aren’t being pressured by the developers. 

But such pressure only has heavy traction because the voters implicitly agree with the overall effect of raising house prices.

Politicians also aren’t dumb enough to _not_ invest, so of course they own investment properties.
It takes as many generations as there were to fuck it up to repair it again.
I know rents are meant to be included, but there is no way they are factored in as heavily as they should be, rents are going up at more than 10% a year in Sydney with no sign of slowing down.
I'm pretty sure Germany already does something similar.
You’re right, Nordic states, Germany and Austria don’t exist.
Inside their own head? That's the only place on earth I can think of where you could escape corrupt politicians.
[deleted]
[deleted]
[deleted]
The economy might be in better shape had we not allowed housing to become the investment of choice in this country. That doesn’t mean we can fix house prices quickly without causing a recession. Affordable shelter for all is probably worth having a recession for.
This is also the reason why rising house prices are not considered in the CPI, meaning rising house prices (as capital not rental returns) do not add to inflation.
The housing market makes up as much as 40% of all economic activity in this country. Saying the housing market is not the economy might be true in other countries, but for Australian households (as in non-corporate entities) the housing market quite literally is their economy along with mining that is the only reason our country is not laughed at when we try to buy an iPhone with our silly monopoly money.

Go look at your bank balance. At least 2/3 of that money and most money you interact with in the "economy" is someone else's outstanding mortgage. Now, tell me again how the housing market is not the economy in Australia as far as households are concerned.
Yes, but also, if you buy a house, someone else is selling a house and getting the money. People are usually buying it with debt, thus creating money.
Absolutely on point. I have one house - my PPOR - all other investments are in business that make things, employ people, etc.  Reduce tax incentives for property, increase tax incentives for investment into businesses/share market if people need hand holding to do so
Unfortunately we need the deepest deflationary recession in a century due to the way successive governments have incentivized unhealthy property investment for more than 30 years. I wish it wasnt the case but here we are.
What will that recession look like when it comes?
The money tied up in housing is already lost. Even if we have a correction on housing stocks and all houses drop in price by half. The banks still have every mortgage holder on the books for whatever they got their loan for. But now you also have 2/3rds of the country pissed off because they have a loan for an asset that is not worth the loan value anymore. There will never be a housing correction. House price must always go up the moment they go down our economy collapses completely.
Hold up, hold up, how does slowing down on the creation of new loans affect existing money?
I think that is correct, right? I’m just trying to make sense of it in my head so talking out loud here. But if our economy was mostly built on housing then we’d all be working in the housing sector or related industries. So it’s more that consumer wealth and spending is tied up in housing. Which isn’t changed because it personally benefits those in power to change it.
“As a proportion of net household wealth, residential property accounted for around 67.9 per cent.” 

[SOURCE](https://www.theadviser.com.au/borrower/45872-house-and-land-prices-bolstering-household-wealth-abs)
Huh? This sub loves hating on Labor, say a bad word about the Greens and you get downvoted to hell and called an idiot.
All political parties are a farce. They all lie to gain everyone's vote and then once they have it, they only work to line their own pockets. Anyone with allegiance to a single party is just displaying their ignorance and stupidity.
> This ridiculous urban sprawl that's gobbling up land and nature at the outskirts of every city does nothing more than to exacerbate the housing crisis

Are you able to explain how increasing the total housing supply is exacerbating the current housing situation?
There's plenty of uninhabited bits that have adequate rainfall.

http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall/maps/aus/rnausan.png
> The government really should have thought of that before turning the majority of Australia into a barren desert.

I think the desert was there well before the current system of government was established.
Well what would the solution be for government funded housing? Where would they put it? There’s not a great deal of land around near Sydney or Melbourne to build anything low density
The ultimate example of mediocrity. A failure as a finance minister, a failure as a treasurer, a bad joke as a PM contender. 

Then when he leaves politics he gets the ultimate golden parachute for worthless political oxygen thieves: the ambassadorship to Washington. At the end of his term his mates in the Peter Costello Times start pumping up his tyres, and the best "legacy" they can find for him is that he *reinstated the embassy tennis court.*

I assume he is now collecting board memberships like fucking Pokemons now.
Sounds like the ultimate leaner to me.
[deleted]
Lots of politicians have invested in owning child care centers aka Dutton has two and is using commonwealth funding. Also employment services centers are another one they make a lot of money off.
You are absolutely right, totally forgot about hand outs of government contracts
As someone from Malaysia, saying the level of corruption or democracy between the two countries are close is so out of touch imo
There’s more than a sliver of truth in “We get the leaders we deserve”…
So... you are suggesting people vote not on policy, but personality?

Jeepers... :(

But seems to fit with observed outcomes over several decades, sadly.
If voters want to vote on personality rather than policy, then they don't get to turn around and say they don't want the policy of the mob they helped vote in.

For what it's worth though, I think a lot of people were up to their eyeballs in housing debt at the time, got worried (rightly or not) that Shorten's negative gearing policy might destabilize the market and put them into negative equity, and voted to prevent that.
It is small, yes, but it affected everyone.

A lot of APS retirees who'd carefully arranged their pensions to allow them to access the age pension and get those juicy welfare benefits attached to it suddenly found that nope, not anymore. And they got quite upset - as they can't change their pension choices once made... 

So their income dropped and their expenses increased - not exactly a change designed to win votes!

There is also that proposed law capping the tax discount to the first $3 million balance of a superfund as well, which will affect a growing number of wealthy people (like pollies) as time passes, though it's not introduced and may never be.
> Yeah, but they're also willing to make them less lucrative.

Only as a lip service.
Nah you just carry on that you’re the only people who are willing to fix it and then block all legislation. 

Mereen’s portfolio won’t take a hit and you look like you care!
Just another example of their hypocrisy
Sounds like we agree on this.

They’re being pressured by the voting base. The majority of voters are boomers who want house prices to go up and will vote accordingly. The greens have amazing policies that will never be implemented because they can’t get more than 5 seats per election. You have to get voted in to do anything, Labor need to get in so they have to sell their soul to the selfish and the low information voters. It sucks but it’s our system.
They are included correctly - but it's the price on average people pay so if your rent hasn't increased then it isn't included.
Space!
Damn you are lucky to have the means to live overseas. I wish I could leave this dumpster fire of a country behind.
[deleted]
Those 4 points you mentioned, Australia has them, no?
It's an old meme. "Always has been"
So you're also claiming its simple despite all the abundance of evidence to the contrary. You didn't even list financing, progress payments, defects, remediation etc... even thats not a complete list.

There's multiple distinct professions dedicated just to the process of getting buildings built and you've undercut literately all of that to have a whine along with punter.
Recession schmeschmession. Eliminating the concept that shelter is an investment is more important than avoiding a recession that will end. 

But yknkw, they won't. So when it's time to eat the rich, landlords are on the wrong side of that debate. 

And I know how much tenants will want to personally thank landlords for their contribution.
Very good point! We also have an absurd amount of bank balance sheet concentrated in housing, like stupidly dangerous levels. Global market analysts have been pointing this out as a problem quite regularly for years now. 

If housing crashed it would take our banks with it. That alone is a massive economic risk. Then consider that we only really have four banks...

We've painted ourselves into this corner. It's a drag on innovation, and productivity, and families will continue to suffer at ever increasing levels.
That is the upside of all this. Right now no one can afford to do much of anything in this country. The cost of entry to business has gotten too high, and no one has any time left in their working life after repaying the home loan to start a business.

One good deflationary recession and suddenly in a few years people are opening shops and pricing out the wasteful large chain stores. People will look at empty shops and think "you know, I could start a business making stuffed cane toads there, only have to sell a dozen to make rent for the week", and so they will!

There is a lot of room for massive economic growth and opportunity after we get this little recession we have to have part 2 out of the way.
100% true. Ever since the GFC, when everybody "had to be saved" and bad businesses were funded by government to keep the economy flowing we have been on the wrong economic path. Things were just starting to correct themselves in 2019 and then we got Covid-19 and again, the government bailed out bad business. We need a recession unfortunately,  to clear out bad businesses and reset the economy. Anyone who thinks Coles and Woolworths (as examples) are well run businesses is dreaming, they are profitable due to monopoly.
In a healthy economy, people who make bad decisions lose money. If you undermine that principle you undermine everything that drives us to better outcomes.
It is here already, and it looks like this.

I expect unemployment to really tick up quickly from here for the rest of the year, the ABS will probably declare a 'real' recession in the October quarter but the effects are already plain to see. The only change you are going to see is slowly more and more people will complain about losing their job or getting hours cut. Unfair dismissal posts on reddit will start trending, that kind of thing.

But the actual recession? The part where our economy is shrinking? That is already happening. Remember the statistics from the ABS are rear looking, when they release their data for the October quarter, it will be January next year and they will simply be confirming what we already know.
See the Melbourne real estate crash of 1891. That’s where we’re headed.  

https://www.afr.com/wealth/the-great-australian-property-crash-of-1891-why-it-could-happen-again-20151207-glh724


And if 1891 seems like too long ago to matter, consider that the effects of the crash only stopped reverberating in the 1950s.

Right around the time the boomers were born, come to think of it…
We could have a price correction of 20% and literally only the people who have purchased in the last few years would be affected and if you werent planning to sell you can still pay your mortgage. Property cant be seen as a sure thing from an investment perspective, that is part of the problem
Well, the banks are fucked if enough people default. The normal approach is then to bail out the banks.


The correct approach is to aggressively support people to service the loan ***on their PPOR*** or, perhaps, on a single property of their choosing, which for many will be their PPOR.


Anything beyond that one property may get liquidated. Tough shit.


And that process will probably fuck the banks. Tough shit. Any support whatsoever provided to the banks - for the purposes of maintaining our overall economic infrastructure, not saving their asses - should lead to government owning a commensurate stake.


A correction to our fucked economy would hurt. But if well-managed, it could serve as a pretty natural mechanism for rapidly rebalancing some catastrophic structural problems such as wealth concentration and privatisation.
>There will never be a housing correction. House price must always go up the moment they go down our economy collapses completely.

The issue here is that the expectation is the economy cannot crash because it must always be on an upward trajectory, it can and possibly will crash. Australians have been rather sheltered from major economic corrections like the Asian Crisis, or the GFC, corrections happen. The problems that potentially come from this one however will be felt by every Australian, homeowner or not. 

For every dollar spent on paying back a mortgage a percentage of that does not get funneled back into the economy, the same economy in which money flows back into people's pockets as salaries. 

Now while housing can stimulate the economy via construction etc, you see construction companies starting to crash also.
You seem to have missed the point. The people repaying the banks are repaying the money that is otherwise used to do things like... pay wages. In the event home prices decline, say we have a period of no economic growth and home prices just stay where they are now... the new loans issued by the banks will be less than the existing repayments. If people actually keep repaying their loans we will quickly be in a situation where your boss will say "Sorry, can not pay you this week, there is no money in the bank".

Our economy is homeloans. If they stop getting bigger (not stop, just stop getting larger), no new money enters the system to replace the repayments and interest taken out.
About 2/3 of existing money is old loans. Those loans are still being repaid to the banks. The system works because new borrowers take out ever larger loans to inject enough money to replace the repayments and cover the interest costs.

Except now, the borrowing is slowing/stopped. That means each month less money is put into the wallets of households than they have to repay to the banks. The longer we do this, the less money exists in the real world. Now picture what happens if only 1/2 the existing $2T in loans are replaced with new loans over the next few years. Suddenly money becomes worth a lot more because there is less of it. This is deflation.
Our economy is pretty well insulated when it comes to housing. For instance the way land titles work in Aus makes a shock crash like USA during gfc next to impossible
> say a bad word about the Greens and you downvoted to hell and called an idiot.

Usually because the person "saying a bad word" is just mindlessly repeating unfounded murdoch propaganda.
Yes i think thats a flaw with the video, unless hes implying that Austraila should transition to apartment living to solve the housing crisis? Because the Australian dream of a Mcmansion on a large property isnt possible anymore with the current levels of immigration.
Not true.

Just ask him.
Is that seriously legal? Wtf
Spot on
Yeah. Australia is a disgustingly corrupt place politically.

It's also a corruption free paradise compared to 80% of the world.
We're not _quite_ as bad as the US with their two-party politics, but it's pretty darn close. I think a binary choice is a little "low-res" to be making fine-grained inferences about the voting public's feelings on specific policies. Yet politicians and media commentators always seem so sure. Funny how their line-ball judgements always seem to align with the interests of the upper middle class?!
We do agree but the video (and most upvoted videos on this topic) never bring it up. 

Nobody gets views by blaming the viewers, so it’s always the “evil developers and the corrupt politicians”. 

They are those things, but it also the voters fault for tacitly endorsing their actions.

Then they turn on labour when they can’t magically fix the problem and we are back to the liberals being in charge.
30% of people that live in Sydney rent, just under 3 million people that would disagree with you saying that rent hasnt increased, when you factor in the disproportionate impact because of the already high prices I would say there is a strong argument that the weightings are not correct.
Well it *is* the one place that cannot be corrupted by capitalism.
You've completely missed his point. With Australia's vast natural resources, wealth and geographical location, the lifestyle he's described is a "privilege" that every Australian should be able to have. Fuck me, the country has the potential to become a real-life Wakanda.
The thing is, we could have ALL these things if the government actually decided to act in the interest of its population and we as a nation stop buying into Murdoch’s bullshit and voting in corrupt cunts.

Instead, we voted in politicians who have gifted almost a trillions dollars of OUR wealth away to their mates in the mining, gas/oil sector, sold off all our public assets to other mates so we’re at the mercy of greedy corporations and gutted public education all so that our house prices can go up.
This sort of outcome shouldn't be seen as a privilege. It should be seen as the goal and the norm for everyone. 

Unfortunately, Australia has taken a different path.
[deleted]
The recession will end, but so will their careers.
Housing no longer needs to 'crash' to take the banks with it. It simply has to stop growing in value. That is it. If we stop the growth in home lending and just hold prices where they are right now... the entire system collapses and takes the 'economy' with it along with the banks. We are past the point of requiring a crash of any kind to trigger it, that is why we have been importing so many people. If not for the growth in prices driven by the new migration our housing prices would have stalled already triggering a recession and deflation.
I really don’t think Colesworth are the ones who will disappear in a recession.
Agree but it went back further, when Australian banks were privatised money was opened up in ways it never has been before. That was the start from my perspective.
Yeah but we're not all investors and asking for new home owners / mortgage holders to take the hit when most of that cohort are part of demographics who have been taking non stop hits is a shit move that only widens the generational wealth disparity. 

The solution needs to come from where the rort is. Where ever we have our taxes propping up capital that is being used inefficiently. 

It's punitive to punish people just for having a mortgage in the last few years. 

It's sensible to stop providing tax breaks to people who can't run a successful business to a level of quality and standard we would expect in our time and place.
Best of luck getting elected on these points mate.
You can not make the banks pay for individuals paying to much for home loans. I am a fucking moron who bought in the last 12 months. Anyone who has bought a house in the last two years is an idiot for doing so. But no one should bail me out for my own fuck up of monumental proportions. I know the unit I bought is not worth the half a million I gave to the previous owner and certainly not worth the million plus I will give to the bank over 20 years. This is my fuck up, my own doing and if I lose my job and have to sell the unit at a loss I will have no one to blame but me.
What do you think "unsustainable growth" means? 

its far better to have it sooner rather than later, we probably should have had it 10 years ago. now is the second best time for it to happen though, kicking the can down the road is just making the problem worse.
So, like... houses are buckets of cash that need to be filled up, and in the last decade the buckets grew into skips. And the money never comes back out.

But I feel like I picked on a fairly minor issue - if loans slowed down, I'm sure balance could be achieved through other methods, waiting for wage growth or [insert purely thought out ideas here].
This is r/australia, there's like 10 people on here that consume Murdoch media.
The greens seem to have no issue in scrapping all our border security policies and bringing the same chaos of undocumented migrants plaguing the UK and US to Australia.
FIGJAM
No, it isn't. If the lease is not "arm's length" and below market rate, you can only claim a deduction up to the value of the income. No negative gearing allowed.
Well they are increasing at 8% a year in Sydney that is the fact - and you have no actual strong argument, besides feelings, that weightings are wrong.
I moved here 20 years ago (from Canada) and it was good here.  I have teen kids and dread for their future.

We could have some of the cheapest utility costs, but shareholders need their piece first.

We could have great primary and secondary education, but it's more important to keep the old boys club happy with private schools.

We could have fully funded tertiary education (TAFE and Uni), but god forbid the giant resource exports should be slightly inconvenienced. 

This country's leaders have sold out the future for generations here.
Wait so you own a company that builds houses and you still fucked up your own list of 'how hard could it be'? Perhaps its the people who work for you who actually know how hard it actually is cos you clearly don't. Perhaps they'd look at your posts and cringe at how little you understand of what you do, then realise why you undervalue them so much.

You're clearly talking out of your ass here. Lets put you straight, it's a little more complicated than just hammering nails into a plank, oh sorry hiring someone else to hammer nails into a plank. You're at the very tail end of a huge process and your complete blindness to all the really complicated things that were handled for you shows.

Cos if we want to build one house we'll call you, well actually we can call the guys who you call and skip you. We actually want to build hundreds of thousands and that's going to need to scale up just a little bit more than 'its simple, just give this redditor the money and hope he knows what to do with it'...

Cos as you pointed out, you aren't even in Australia, I don't even know why the fuck you're even commenting on this r/Australia post. But I guess Punter's videos are for you, you know getting angry and hitting things.
Agree but a recession opens up opportunities for other players to enter the market
ppor are not affected by their value of their house. the only people who benefit are those who don't need to live in the home that their mortgage is servicing. 

also. people get loans for cars that depreciate quickly so I think you overestimate the effect it will have. 

they will continue to be paying a lot of money for a house that isn't worth that much.... but its only not worth that much because others aren't buying it, not because anything intrinsically happens to the house. are they mortgaging to live somewhere they own or are they mortgaging to make money?
They dont take a hit if they are not planning to sell, they made a bad investment decision and they over paid for something, but they shouldnt have the mortgage in the first place if they cant afford to make the repayment. They may feel bad but the reality is they pay out their mortgage the same as they planned to and eventually it is worth the price they paid again.
The tax breaks and housing are partially separate issues. Even if you stripped tax incentives away, what impact would that have on the housing market, it could lead to potential job loss putting further strain on the economy, but that is not to say that some businesses possibly should not exist. 

Even if this was stripped away and money redirected into the housing market there are still major issues like the lack of resources in labor, and building more houses could affect the current housing supply. 

You cannot have all winners here, someone is going to have to lose.
Cool story.

The reason you have to backstop people from losing their PPOR is because it provides the sort of basic social security needed for the economy to otherwise begin to recover. It's got very little to do with specific, personal sympathies; very little to do with 'blame' and 'responsibility'.

And of course you can let the banks eat shit and die. Just because they could keep lending without knowing if or when the entire economic structure would implode doesn't mean they should have. They are greedy cunts who have taken a gamble. It's been a smart gamble thus far, mostly because they know they can manipulate policy direction and policy response to crises - i.e. they can get themselves bailed out. Hopefully one day that gamble will fail, and the house (i.e. the taxpayer) can collect a long-overdue windfall.
This is a common misconception. The money does in fact 'come out' of the house when someone buys it. For every buyer there is a seller. The seller takes the money the buyer borrows for the house and goes and pays builders to make another home. Or they take some of the money and buy new stuff for their other home. Or they simply pay their cleaner with some of the money. You see how every single loan generates ever more money in the economy? That is what has driven most of the growth in this nation's economy over the last three decades.

In the early 2010's perhaps we could have had an unwinding like you speak of. The problem is too large now. Our nation grew really large, very quickly. We made a whole lot of money out of leveraging the future output of households (you and I working for the rest of our lives to repay a mortgage), but that has simply come to an end now. We did it for 30 years (since the 90's when credit limits were removed), and now every eligible worker is either leveraged for the next 3 decades already.

IF we had invested all that money into something like car factories or steel mills then at least we would have things to make, sell and fund the repayments with. But we spent it all on houses, then we knocked them down and built two houses in the same spot. To put it simply, there is one of two ways this goes. Either the government starts handing out a few billion each month to households to build more homes and somehow tax payers become the next generation of new home buyers while inflation rockets, or deflationary recession is locked in as $2 trillion plus interest is sucked out of the economy (our wallets). Neither option is good, but that is all that is left for us short of some AI powered miracle unfortunately.
A fact??? I can get stats that say anywhere from an average of 9 to 13.5 annually . You stating they are weighted correctly could hardly be classed as a fact, just your opinion which you are welcome to. 

When CPI is running at 3.5% and accommodation is everybody who rents biggest expense by a long way, I think the evidence is pretty clear that it isnt weighted correctly.
>We could have fully funded tertiary education

We did have this and most of the current politicians got free degrees
I think IGA, Friendly’s, or FoodWorks would disappear before Colesworth unfortunately
It would be Walmart coming in and capturing the entire market potentially.
You're right but if we're talking 20% drops the wider economy at that point is probably in the toilet, and those owner occupiers probably *won't* be safely paying their mortgage. For them, they've been fucked at both ends of the economic curve - finally scraping together enough to buy with extreme prices, then getting screwed when they go to sell. Meanwhile, the landlord class is still largely safe and secure.

As a homeowner I'm happy for some corrections because ultimately I'm in a fairly safe position and can afford for prices to fall a bit and not be completely screwed. But I also don't want to see a lot of owner occupiers get fucked over because they had the audacity to buy when they could. I want the landlord class to suffer the burden.
I think you have misread what I am saying.

Why should a new home owner bear the costs of falling house prices? They didn't make a bad investment decision they bought a home. And they might want to sell because moving houses is normal when your circumstances change.
The banks did not take a gamble. I took a gamble that I could continue to pay off a million dollar loan for a half million dollar unit that everyone knows is only worth about $50K. If it was not for the kind hearted banks I would be living under a tree in the middle of nowhere, with my kids starving to death in my arms. If not for the banks I would have been fired for being homeless. If I lose my PPOR I am the only person to blame as I am the one who bought in a market that everyone knows will collapse. I bought in a market that everyone knows is massively overpriced. I am the one who decided to pay half a million to someone for the sole use of their $50K unit. No one else is to blame for my poor decisions and no one else should pay for my poor decisions.
No,American retailers haven't done to well in  Australia with the exception of Costco which has a completely different offering.  You just need to look at Woolworths/Masters debacle, Woolworths let Americans run Masters. Even with MacDonald's  most of the innovation in the 90/00's  originated from Australia.
Because the alternative is prices keep going up and that is not viable, it breaks at some point and we are almost there. I suppose it would be preferrable that there was a slow correction where property prices didnt go up for 10 years, but I dont see that as a possibility. 

By your logic we should never change the laws because it will always impact somebody. Purchasing a home is an investment no matter how you look at it. Sometimes the greater good needs to take priority.
Righto, John Galt.
My own logic was to remove tax payer subsidies that prop up speculation. 


There is a third option which is prices flatten which is probably the best outcome for everyone.
removing tax payer funded subsidies = crash. It has been tried Labor removed negative gearing at one point, it lasted about 6 months from memory. The problem is we need housing investment, both developers adding to the housing supply and long term investors renting out properties. That type of investment needs to be encouraged. 

From my perspective the real issue is people buying property holding onto it for a couple of years, doing minimal improvement, not adding housing stock, and then selling the property because real estate always goes up in Australia.
