
I thought AUKUS was about buying gold plated nuclear submarines in twenty years time?
Isn’t that what billionaires have been doing for a while now?
This is worth reading.
NZ *Post-American-Democracy Trump World* is the context missing from article text there. Alluded to above by another reddit user.


If happens, all bets are certainly off for anything other than Trump trying to turn America into a Russia-style *kleptocracy*. In event - the lead-up to, I think that there will be such a flight of human and other capital, US economy will actually collapse. Military allowing, Republicans might then get their chance... 


Many in the 'human capital' part of that have purchased property in NZ with intent to relocate if need be. Stephen Colbert and Jon Stewart have certainly been unsubtle in indicating their plans, just recently...
I think a lot of counties are considering contingencies for a post American world Europe is. The Ukraine aid bill fiasco earlier this year was a wake up call for many nations in Europe.
It's good that it passed but how long was it stuck in congress
Good article.
Hugh White's [recent article about AUKUS](https://www.australianforeignaffairs.com/essay/2024/02/dead-in-the-water) in *Australian Foreign Affairs* is the required background reading for this article. 
[removed]
Zombie Scummo job application to BAE systems. Only will cost Australia half a trillion dollars for Collin class v2.0
TL;DR, American decline, China rise. Aus and NZ in the middle. Nothing really new and interesting in the article.
Site doesn't load.
No no no - we must gleefully and gratefully join with the USA in a suicide pact against China! /s
Looking at AUKUS, it’s closer to a five eyes style agreement but for technology sharing and direct military support. 

Submarines are a big part of this but it’s just one part of the technology sharing and is only a small supporter of the wider defence collaboration and integration.
I didn’t know that New Zealand was getting nuclear submarines 🤦
Its about buying american subs "checks small print" assuming america ever gets to a point where they dont want them themselves.......... so never.
Pretty sure it's about putting ourselves right at the front of the firing line doing freedom of navigation operations and being a base ala Ukraine for an insane war with 1.4B Chinese. If we get really lucky we get to be a nuclear battleground that America, China, or Europe doesn't care about. It's really very far away from all of them and they can always call it off if limited nuclear war turns out to be that bad.

But just imagine the rewards should we win.
Well nobody has upvoted it, so I beg to differ.
I feel Trump's chances of being re-elected are exaggerated. Perhaps not without reason (being complacent is part of how he got elected in the first place).
It doesn't matter if it is Trump or Harris that is elected, the US' foreign policy, the driver for its international standing, has been pretty much the same for both parties - increase military excursions, enforce geopolitical positions on countries, prop up favorable regimes and instill civil unrest in unfriendly regimes, partake in wars of aggression or proxy wars, and do whatever it takes to keep the developing world down. The differences in the parties have been largely for internal domestic policies.

America is a expansionist empire who needs constant wars and constant military spending to remain functional. 1 in 20 Americans have at one time served in the military. Think of how insane that is, and that is at an all time low. The military is their jobs program and that needs to remain functional to keep a significant part of their economy running, so they need military conflicts and wars.
[deleted]
[You're right. ](https://i.imgur.com/FjIKCvw.mp4)
Not an article but a book that costs $25 to read.
>As a long-time follower of New Zealand’s foreign policy from across the Tasman, Hugh White is well aware of both the ties that bind us, and the crucial differences that can make comparisons a somewhat fraught exercise.
>
>**“I’m very careful and very conscious that the last thing anybody in New Zealand wants is an Australian coming to tell them what to do about defence policy.”**
>
>The academic and international relations analyst is visiting our shores this week as the result of an invitation from former Labour prime minister Helen Clark and ex-National leader Don Brash.

He’s just saying he has to be careful not to put to them off by being patronising.

If you led a conversation in NZ with what you said, they’d tell you to fuck off back home.
New Zealand is to Australia what Australia is to America. Every time an Australian complains about America dragging them from one geopolitical dick-measuring contest to another, that is the exact same thing the Kiwis don't like about America and are concerned about Australia doing.
I don't think it will happen now. Perhaps 10 years ago, yeah. China is going the way of Japan: too old. American hegemony will continue for the foreseeable future.

The only way I could see China becoming the sole Superpower is if they invade Taiwan now and win. The longer they wait, the older they get. And they can't beat the vibrant immigrant population of the US economically.
> Nothing really new and interesting in the article.

Except that few people ever talk about it.
Could be a temporary glitch, it works for me.
Inshallah, comrade!
It's a pretty hefty commitment on our part. I would expect such a large investment would ensure future US commitment in return. 
I didn’t either, that’s fun.
TIL USA has never decommissioned a military vessel
You want the real shocking news? We will get affected by it anyways and we arent strong enough to be independent. China would conquer us as a side note in a neutral scenario to deny USA.


US homeland is getting hit and world trade and daily life is going to be interrupted you are acting like this is Afghanistan or something not WW2 level where you didnt get to pick be morally superior and stay out of it.


We didn't invest enough in defence detterance or independent supply chains/sovereign capability. So we have no choice now in what happens.


But you also said Ukraine is a plan to get a USA base, so I guess if Taiwan or we get attacked we are asking for it and it is USA's fault/plan somehow and the USA isn't the reason we had peace and stability since WW2.


It isnt China going on the aggressive and literally bullying us, its those damn Yankees because my Chinese/Russian social media propaganda told me so.
Probs because nobody reads past the headline and assumes it's got nothing to do with Australia.
[You're right ](https://i.imgur.com/6jSDG1n.jpeg)
That is all true, but with Trump you actually get a leader who pays zero attention and has zero knowledge of anything of this. He's literally just going to do whatever he wants at any given moment, and if he takes power this time his administration will be 100% made up of loyal Trumpists. Last time, he had people around who acted as checks and balances and he has learned from this. This time, it will be so much worse.

The reality is that America's economy influences the stability of the rest of the world, Australia included. If Trump takes power, the chaos in America will tank the economy and therefore harm us in Australia. And that's not even counting the human toll of the millions of LGBT Americans, non-Christian Americans, American women, etc who will lose their rights overnight and almost certainly be subject to violence.
In rather broad way, it matters a lot. Harris does offer some hope, of sorts, and has made a good decision, this very day. Trump will engineer proverbial 'October surprise', though, maybe a little before. I'm rather certain of that.


Another Trump 'administration' would certainly see America expansionist in renewed sense. Deals to carve-up the world. Steven Miller may receive promotion to Secretary of State, in order to handle some of those negotiations. 
Excellent post.  All great reasons why many in Australia are happy for leaders to pivot to a position of diplomacy between the US and China, and away from expressions of blanket support for ‘US interests’ only, which inevitably threatens peace in our region.
Just sky-yet-to-fall and with-some-luck-won't, stuff.
[removed]
I agree, we can already see the cracks in their economy. Ukraine has showed us how fucking difficult offensive total war is in the modern age - try doing that across a strait with only 3 landable beaches on an island with three types of terrain (mountain, tropical forest, urban) that is filled to the gills with American weapons. If China goes to war it will break itself in Taipei, or utterly annihilate with nukes their own people and the economic prize.
I think they've just isolated themselves so much geopolitically. Not to mention the one child policy has made it so it's boom or bust on the war. They lose and their population is fucked for another 20 years, almost not worth trying.
And we should be happy about this, take your pick. A Europe divided that cant make a decision on anything, totalitarian China that wants to be your friend while doing everything to wipe you out, Putins evil Russia  and the dictators in the middle east that wants to wipe everyone of their brothers out with their brand of idiocy and religion.

 I half heartedly open my arms and welcome USA hegemony. A USA  that still has  the rule of law and courts that respect doing the right thing and respects their constitution that's not a kangaroo court system. 

The USA is the only beacon of hope in a dark world ruled by lot of stupid regimes whose only end goal is to dominate and wipe you out. The USA is truly a pill that you can swallow and it at least gives you hope rather than despair.  

I am not a fanboy of the USA and the problems in their society but lets be frank there  isn't a lot of choices out there that even competes with them in the comfort and wellbeing stakes. 

Just imagine today what the  world would be like if the USA was to suddenly vanish, we would all be rooted. Who would you turn too that will give the same leadership without throwing you in jail or wanting to go war with you. Frankly speaking there is no other player on the global stage that equals the collective overall sensibility of the USA.

We should not be wishing a pox on the demise of the USA
Except china isn't aiming to be the sole super power. 
It's more like America does something stupid and screws itself. The UK had Brexit and is vanishing down the gurgler, the US can easily have a second Trump presidency or a civil war. All China needs to do is sit tight and look relatively sane, which admttedly seems to be a challenge for Pooh.
It’s been talked about non stop for the last 20 years. 
Yep, but life is too short. 🙂
Getting access for hundreds of billions of dollars of existing RND is quite nice. 

Also allowing for more interoperability between USAF, UKAF, JSDF and ADF is quite valuable, like a mini NATO. 

I think looking at it objectively it’s a good deal, but comparing it to other budget priorities 10b per year might not be the best use of funds.
There's no such obligation being put upon the US. 
We won't.

We stubbornly refuse to take part in the development of civilization because of a statement we made in the 80's. All nuclear = bad now.

Forever.
Out of China and USA, only one has enacted a coup against the Australian government and had a sitting PM sacked for threatening to close down Pine Gap.

So both sides have the potential to fuck us over, but one side has already demonstrated the means and the willingness to.

Coincidentally it's the same country that is the only country ever to use nuclear weapons against civilians. And you want to tie yourself to them.
We already sell our resources for no royalty to China, who pay far more than the US ever did. The historical average price of iron ore pre-China was $10 a tonne. That's what the US alliance got us.

In any event, I have no stake in what Australia gets for our resources - and China just wants a limitless supply from the lowest cost producer, which is us. I'm fine for that to continue.. it's probably only the US who doesn't.

Given the only thing the US is offering us is the total destruction of the only country interested in our resources in volume, what precisely is the point of our alliance with the USA? At best, the US alliance will only make us into what Keating warned in the 80s - a banana republic.
[removed]
Wait a minute --- there's something past the headline and the picture ?!?!
Happy to be Kirk.
[deleted]
> And that’s not even counting the human toll of the millions of LGBT Americans, non-Christian Americans, American women, etc who will lose their rights overnight and almost certainly be subject to violence.

This won’t happen. Didn’t happen in the last trump presidency and it won’t happen if he gets in again. I don’t like the guy but this sounds like Democratic Party slippery slope propaganda, and isn’t based in reality.
The main benefit of Harris winning is that the US will continue its transition to the green economy. If Trump wins, the US will become a global obstacle to the whole thing.


As for the rest of it, the US will likely trundle on as it always has. It won't really change what it does internationally, except that it will pollute the planet, accelerating climate change until we go past some turning point where there'll be massive die offs due to crop failures, food shortages, and natural disasters. 
The US is an empire that is trying to keep its greatest geopolitical rival down through any means possible. Except you cant stop the economic rise of a nation that has 4x the population that you do, nor can you win a military conflict against a near-peer military, against a country the size of the US itself, who has focused the last 20 years on developing a military purely to counter US naval supremacy, right in the own back yard.

If we stick unquestioning to the US, we will just be dragged into more and more wars as it attempts to secure its place in the world as the global hegemon and eventually bite off more than it can chew and end up in an absolute bloodbath.

I think a lot of political leaders in the US are stuck in the 90s where the US reigned supreme with no one to challenge them and believe the world is still the same where they are the only top dogs. Add that to the crazy amount of nationalism that is taught to them through school and you have a political class that believes in US manifest destiny and, to some extent, the US and its military untouchable.
You’re right in the sense that I couldn’t ever see NZ changing “allegiances” to China.

But that reality also validates their concerns: AUKUS is a pact they have no say in, and yet NZ would be one of the nations heavily impacted by a China agitated by nuclear submarines ostensibly keeping them in line.

Dear ol’ NZ is walking a line where they want to honour their historical ties with western alliances, while not wanting to be pushed into conflict (ranging from diplomatic to military) they have no real say in.

It’s like when the US invades somewhere in the Middle East and then expects us to send logistical aid in the form of boots on the ground - we do it, but fuck we’re bitter about it.

…I should probably get to work…
> The reality is New Zealand would be dumb as fuck to align with China

That's a false dichotomy: the best thing for New Zealand would be to become Switzerland, if that's possible.
>The USA is the only beacon of hope in a dark world ruled by lot of stupid regimes whose only end goal is to dominate and wipe you out. The USA is truly a pill that you can swallow and it at least gives you hope rather than despair.


You can say that because you live in Australia. In the developing world? Not so much. The US is invested in keeping the status quo because the status quo keeps them on top. Countries that want their own independence? Want control over their own resources? Don't want to be at the whim of the US withdrawing capital and crashing their economies? Don't want all their infrastructure and industries owned by US companies? Want their standard of living to improve? Not so much. 


We're close to a century into a period of US global dominance. How many poor countries have made it out of the poverty trap? How many countries has the US destabilised or destroyed so it can have access to bananas, oil, minerals, or gas? US hegemony hasn't been great for the vast majority of the population of the planet. 
Agree 100%. People often look at American hegemony and ask “Is this fair, right or just for America to have this much power”. And usually then advocate for a reduction in the Australian/American alliance. What we should be asking ourselves is “Is American hegemony in the interest of Australia and her people”. The obvious answer, at least today and into the future is yes.
[removed]
We're on the Multipolar Express, baby!
Trump is all talk through. He did have four years and he just played golf. He did pass some anti trade laws and the Democrats supported him too. So, the second round will probably be the same.
Western countries plan their future one government term at a time. The Chinese plan centuries ahead.
Not in here.
But the days are long!
Not everyone you disagree with is a "RWNJ". Besides, as a leftie with a level of common sense, they aren't wrong.
Not on reddit there isn't
The Republicans control the House and the Supreme Court, and of Trump wins they'll have the presidency. The only thing they wouldn't have is the Senate, which is useless if all those others are under GOP control.

What was scary about the last Trump presidency is how much he gutted the bureaucracy. I'm not worried about the "deep state," I'm worried about what the Republicans are saying out in the open they want to do and the lack of safeguards in place to rein them in. The US system largely runs on norms, and those are now fully out the window.
> the unelected bureaucracy that stays consistent between administrations

Let me introduce you to "Project 2025" - a big part of which is plans for *how* to replace that unelected (and sometimes elected) bureaucracy with partisan appointments.
Maybe not all those things but we saw what happened at the end of his last term, he got desperate and tried to steal the election only Mike Pence didn’t help out. I think an older more demented man this time will be even more emboldened to break democracy, he’s going to be offering more pardons and breaking more laws because he hasn’t faced the consequences of the last try, yet.
Project 2025 says otherwise. 
I wouldn't bother arguing with people here, they think that there's gonna be an American genocide of like half the country if Trump gets in
No argument with any of that, but you could actually merge those two paragraphs. 


This is not cheery, though already understood by some. No modelling is now, or will, keep up with loss of species or sea-level rise once they really start to kick in. We are already in the feedback loop, permafrost melt with gigatonnes of methane to come. 


So, a descent into chaos. Pace of, is the question. Political ructions will play big role, yes. 
>The US is an empire that is trying to keep its greatest geopolitical rival down through any means possible. 


Basically a replay of the US vs Japan in the 1930s. 


>Except you cant stop the economic rise of a nation that has 4x the population that you do,  


There are more than a few opportunities for China to punch itself in its face, or trip over. China has a lot of internal problems, and some of them are quite considerable. 


>If we stick unquestioning to the US, we will just be dragged into more and more wars as it attempts to secure its place in the world as the global hegemon and eventually bite off more than it can chew and end up in an absolute bloodbath.


Exactly. We want to be in a position where we can avoid unnecessary military entanglements, not get drawn into them because we'd otherwise have no means to defend ourselves. AUKUS is a terrible idea as it removes strategic flexibility from us and gives it to the US. That's an immensely foolish thing for us to do. Whether Australia goes to war should be a decision for Australia, and it should not be a decision made under pressure from an outside nation. Especially when the potential wars do not advance Australian interests, and instead advance those of another nation. 
Yeah there is a big dichotomy in our country between maintaining our traditional values and pursuing a more China friendly policy.

I think eventually we are going to fall off this tightrope
>It’s like when the US invades somewhere in the Middle East and then expects us to send logistical aid in the form of boots on the ground - we do it, but fuck we’re bitter about it.


There's any number of idiots who cheer on the US here, no matter how boneheaded their ideas are. 
If things got to the point of a war with China there'd be no 'walking the line' for NZ. They'd be forced to pick a side, or capitulate to China when they come knocking. No nation is an island anymore.
[deleted]
You'd prefer Russian or Chinese hegemony instead then? Acknowledging that the US is the least of several evils isn't fanboying.


The US for all its faults hasn't genocided anyone for a hundred years or so, and it's been more than two decades since they started an unjust war. I know who I'm picking.
Notably he had all the justification (in the American internal political sphere) he needed to start a war with Iran and decided against it because he didn't want to commit so many to die.
"Life is short, but the days and nights are long  
Time will heal all these wounds  
Some day soon  
I'll be rising I'll be strong"

[But the Days and Nights Are Long]() -  Cheryl Wheeler.
Nothing you can say is going to break through their denial.
Project 2025 is a paper written up by a conservative think tank, and is in no way indicative of what the Republican Party’s goals or plans are if Trump gets elected again. It’s just like when Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) writes up a plan on how the government needs to increase the power of the Royal Australian Navy, but the government completely ignores it and does their own thing.
The US are pushing us off. They're forcing us to choose. 
Well yeah, obviously, but there’s a whole lot of conversation that happens well before that point and NZ is entitled to their agency in those conversations.
Hegemony is the political, economic, and military predominance of one state over other states, either regional or global. In Ancient Greece, hegemony denoted the politico-military dominance of the hegemon city-state over other city-states
(Aside from 300,000 Iraqis)
He gave Iran *casus belli* by openly assassinating Soleimani.
Oh okay, it's just theocratic *aspirations* guys, not real ambitions. Explains why the VP pick endorsed the Project 2025 leader, they totally don't mean to implement **anything**. 


https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/article/2024/jul/30/jd-vance-project-2025-book-foreword 


Let's just say as a parallel example that if ASPI was openly advocating for nuking China I'd be a bit fucking wary of any of their staff, current or former, having the ear of our leadership. That's what it feels like for women looking at the Project 2025 agenda for killing reproductive rights and female bodily autonomy.


 For somebody claiming to be on the fence you're certainly defending white Christian nationalism a lot.
[deleted]
Assassinating him while he was travelling in a diplomatic capacity, in another country, on his way to attend a conference about combating ISIS (one of the few bits of geopolitics where the US and Iran were on the same page). No matter how justified killing him might have been, the way he did it was incredibly stupid and seemed intentionally designed to piss the Iranians off as much as possible.
> Oh okay, it’s just theocratic aspirations guys , not real ambitions. Explains why the VP pick endorsed the Project 2025 leader, they totally don’t mean to implement anything. 

Oh ok, explain why Trump and the Republican Party are endorsing and will implement project 2025 when Trump himself has said this about project 2025? 

“I have no idea who is behind it. I disagree with some of the things they’re saying and some of the things they’re saying are absolutely ridiculous and abysmal. Anything they do, I wish them luck, but I have nothing to do with them.”

Can you also explain why the full project 2025 is being implemented by the Republican Party when in a statement posted to X, Project 2025 emphasized it was independent from the Trump campaign.

“As we’ve been saying for more than two years now, Project 2025 does not speak for any candidate or campaign,” 

And 

“We are a coalition of more than 110 conservative groups advocating policy & personnel recommendations for the next conservative president.” 

And finally

“But it is ultimately up to that president, who we believe will be President Trump, to decide which recommendations to implement.”

https://x.com/prjct2025/status/1809276867347681759?s=46&t=eMhGixwBdBNaeZWszqz_ZQ

> https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/article/2024/jul/30/jd-vance-project-2025-book-foreword 

I would love to have a look at that link, but unfortunately it does not work. So please find another one because without it, your claim is baseless. 

> Let’s just say as a parallel example that if ASPI was openly advocating for nuking China I’d be a bit fucking wary of any of their staff, current or former, having the ear of our leadership. That’s what it feels like for women looking at the Project 2025 agenda for killing reproductive rights and female bodily autonomy.

And that’s where the issue lies here. You think that think tanks are actually governmental advisory body’s. That’s incorrect. ASPI and The Heritage Foundation DONT have “the ear” of their respective governments. They are private research institutes that perform research and advocacy for concerning topics such as social policy, political strategy, economics, military, technology, and culture, and then post their findings to the public. I could start one tomorrow and start brewing out research papers about whatever I wanted. That does not mean that anyone will listen.  

> For somebody claiming to be on the fence you’re certainly defending white Christian nationalism a lot.

If you say that all pedophiles should be stoned, and I say that no, they should not. That does not make me a supporter of pedos or one myself. An outrageous claim was made

 “the rights of millions of women, LGBT and non Christian Americans will be stripped OVERNIGHT, and violence will commence against them.” 

And I have simply responded with saying, no that’s fucking ridiculous lol 😂 It’s ironic that you are calling me a defender of white Christian nationalism but you yourself are apparently unaware that your beliefs on Project 2025 stem from the democratic party’s presidential campaign efforts. Clearly they are trying to spook the public into voting democrat to “stop project 2025!” It’s a scare tactic and very common in political landscapes, especially around election time. Be more aware.
Feel free to tell the folks at Wikipedia where I swiped that edefoinition.
Outside of the terrible tragedy of shooting down those civilian planes, the Iranians did pretty much nothing to actually provoke the US afterwards because they know the US military would wipe them off the face of the earth.

Also the Iranians allegedly just tried to have Trump assassinated, so he has some justification now.
Fuck trump
Oh man, you're really not helping the image here. Stop trying to "both sides" this issue when it's quite clear you're defending these theocrats.


You could just google that article, but sure, here it is again:


https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/article/2024/jul/30/jd-vance-project-2025-book-foreword


But instead you believe the words of a convicted felon and very well known liar when he says he doesn't know. Even Trump supporters know Trump is a liar and a conman. 


Why have so many of his staff have been linked to Project 2025? 


https://www.cnn.com/2024/07/11/politics/trump-allies-project-2025/index.html


140 people involved with both Trump and Project 2025, half of whom directly contributed to Project 2025 literature. Sure, maybe Trump himself doesn't know what it is but his retinue sure do.


Again, one side wants to install a full blown white Christian patriarchal theocracy and you're out here saying "nuh uh, they've just contributed to and published papers about the idea but they're not actually serious about it" like you've got rocks in your head.
