
Regardless of whether Reynolds wins or loses this case she has done more damage to her own reputation than Higgins ever could 
Reynolds and her legal team have now had another sexual assault survivor subpoenaed because they set up a fundraiser for Higgins.

Really doing their best to win over public opinion...
Nobody is going to remember anything Reynolds has ever done, except this.  
She has claimed she was good at her job but I seriously can't think of anything she has accomplished let alone what portfolio she had.
Was it not revealed in discovery that Reynolds was leaking confidential information to Albrechtsen at the Australian???  How is that not worse than supposedly being defamed by some social media posts?  National publication vs. someone's social media posts???  And why isn't she suing the publisher (Meta or Twitter/X) ????
Wow, she really thinks she was the real victim, doesn’t she?
Reynolds comes across as a mean old cunt
And people wonder why I'm such a cynical old cunt.

Oh, I know, that rape victim said bad things about me, lets sue her.

Hopefully the truth comes out and Reynolds slithers back under her rock.
> Brought into public hatred, scandal, odium and contempt.

> Lowered in the estimation of right-thinking members of the community.

These are Christian Porter levels of playing the victim.
*channeling Linda Reynolds energy*


 None of this would have happened or been a problem if the girl would just go away quietly and deal with her problems !!
I have noticed the right are fond of  silencing those with  less power.  This may hurt democracy. Should  politicians  be forbidden from defamation cases?    

Surely no matter what  the  court says there is no way she can sue someone for talking about their feelings around being raped and not be considered the villain?   
Previous to the court case I had barely noticed Ms Reynolds, who has chosen her own role in this story. She brought herself to my attention, made the fallout of another woman's rape about herself.       
Am amazed that she is telling the court it is not true she was unsupportive when she is has taken her campaign so far.  I wonder if  Ms Higgins can sue her for her insensitive insults. 

Perhaps Ms Reynolds  has not a mature  woman's experience or forbearance to  recognise a young person in pain and not attack them.   But surely even the most dull of us could refrain from inflicting more harm. 

Perhaps she can cry a baptism of tears and become better person. 

https://old.reddit.com/r/australia/comments/1eahyje/senator_linda_reynolds_repeatedly_leaked/
This case seems like a magnet for losers and incompetent fame seekers.
When this case is denied, acquitted or however it works I hope Reynold's faces bankruptcy dealing with legal fees and costs.

Hopefully she won't get a LNP or tax payer bailout.

When you have zero credibility to start with you don't pick a divisive path and this is a strange hill to die on.

What a cunt
She just needed to stop talking about it and people would forget with the next news cycle. But she is doubling down so hard to punish a rape victim, it almost seems like her goal is to cause as much psychological trauma as possible, just because she can.
The Libs will ensure she is well taken care of, perhaps a cushy job as a lobbyist or ambassador to somewhere high profile.
100% - a lesson in how to centre one's self in a situation for which one is not the centre. 

Basically just at popcorn stage.
Yep, and all the bullshit that came with it. An excellent testament to her character.
Maybe.  I think if she repents and stops the case she could perhaps become known in the future for a change of heart, and could perhaps build a legacy  with  something like helping victims.
Linking a source for the claim that Reynolds was leaking information, because I wasn’t sure if it was true at first - it seems very damning for her character:




https://www.news.com.au/national/legal-discovery-reveals-linda-reynolds-leaks/news-story/bd2d1b2f85bb35f4135702be6b06aafd?amp




Reynolds claims that she was “entitled” to deal with the information. I personally think that she’s a piece of shit though, lol.
Just another useless, vile cog of the LNP machine.
I think this case really comes out of the Lehrmann v Network Ten defamation case, where the judge basically ruled that Higgins had gone on a fantasists campaign to allege a grand conspiracy against her, but that that didn't mean she hadn't been raped.  The judge found that she had (on a balance of probabilities) fabricated the bruise photographs used at trial and then alleged what he describes as a "conspiracy theory" to explain the inconsistencies around it, that she lied about the behaviour of Senator Reynolds following the rape (that Reynolds shunned her), that Higgins lied about the support she was given by Reynolds' office following the rape, that she lied about Reynolds office pressuring her to drop the complaint; it really goes on and on.  This defamation complaint flows pretty naturally out of what the first defamation trial found.
How sad is this person's beliefs, and she was a Senator for our country.
Hopefully she loses the rock
LyInG CoW!!!
This is why Reynolds will lose the case. This crap doesn’t fly here.
So are you saying that those with less power should be able say any old shit they like without repercussions? Too many trials in this onmishambles have been distorted by the opinion that Brittany Higgins is very sweet and very sad, without regard to her actions, her evidence, and the applicable law.
She was a LNP minister empathy likely isn't her strongest attribute
Liberals dont give a fuck about other people. That's why she's doing it. I fucking hope she loses her house as the article states.
It’s always the conservative downfall… get offended and ruin themselves (especially if/when they get away with doing something wrong)
True but people on the street will probably call her names for the rest of her life anytime she goes outside in Australia  


And they would be right to do so
Not the comfy chair!!
r/iamthemaincharacter
Not I. The whole 'lying cow' semantics and taking extended leave and avoiding sessions like Senate estimates, among much more fuckery says it all
Reynolds leaking confidential information to the press, having her husband attend the court proceedings prior to her giving testimony, calling Britney a lying cow… all these things are pretty contradictory to the judgement. Not really something that someone with nothing to hide would do imo. I personally found the judge making the judgement that no cover up was the strangest of all, it seemed just tacked onto the end of it. The potential cover up wasn’t being tested in that trial, but it sure wrapped everything up nicely for the previous government.
Disturbing.
“INSTRUCTIONS NOT CLEAR: TABLE, LADDER, CHAIR MATCH BETWEEN LINDA REYNOLDS AND THE ROCK”
That will depend on how long the case goes on for and if Higgins runs out of money. Defamation isn't a cheap walk down to the courthouse. The way it is set up in Australia, you need deep pockets to win. 
> So are you saying that those with less power should be able say any old shit they like without repercussions?

Sure, why not. Good idea. Politicians get parliamentary privilege. They endlessly slag eachother off without a care in the world.

I would have been happy with “let rape victims have a voice”. But great idea, lets go further!
We have to have faith in our courts.   They are stronger than our tears.    

In the interests of democracy should  Australians enjoy some more freedoms to speak around our personal perceptions of the behaviour of public officials?  Things we would have said in kitchens are now sometimes said on social media. 

 Repercussions are not confined to courtrooms. Ms Reynolds  is tearfully seeing repercussions of her saying cruel stuff about Ms Higgins. Without the help of a court.  There can be repercussions  without a defamation trial.
And to think, who actually has more power here? The media does and so does Higgins now in her position of fame and public influence. So talking about silencing ones with less power? That’s what happened to Reynolds. She has every right to fight back and be heard through this court case, which is an appropriate approach than giving one-sided interviews to the media and posting in social media. What an ironic comment by OP about silencing those with less power when this mob mentality attacking Reynolds that the OP is also doing the same thing they claim to be against.
I’d be interested in what our court decides, rather than seeing all these biased opinions about how Higgins seems to be always the victim regardless of what the circumstances are, just because she was very likely the victim once. They both deserve to be heard and the court is the best avenue for this; not the court of public opinion.
The fact that she held a meeting with Brittney to talk about the incident in the same room that she was raped in shows that depth of empathy.

I bet she thinks that she was 'helping support' Brittney by doing this. Such lack of empathy is sociopathic.
How she was ever the NDIS minister I'll never be able to comprehend.
Being a fuckin' idiot is definitely one of her strongest.
It  is quite painfully awful.  I still like to hope for a redemption arc.    Many people do change. I have known so many people who decided to be different and  then became different.
Also if there was no cover up why did Scottie from Marketing request the inquiry into his own office to find out who knew what, when? And if there is nothing to hide why didn’t that report ever get finished or submitted? It all just smells like BS.
It needed to be address because Lehrmann entered it all into evidence, basically saying, "Look, this is the sort of person you're dealing with; do you really believe her?"  The judge essentially said, "I know she's come out with some weird shit but, on the facts that really matter here, yes I do."
Yeah I'm a bit more conflicted by this than I thought I'd be.

What happened to BH was horrific and yeah I think what Reynolds is doing is pretty repugnant.

That said some of the public statements by BH (and her partner) if she couldn't show them to be true were probably pretty big mistakes. In theory if she can show them to be true she should win.

Theres some comments about BH being "silenced". She' hasn't been. It sucks but if you are going to sling public allegations at someone as wealthy or vindictive as LR that you can't back up then you're playing with fire.
Pretty sure supporting Brittney was *not* the thinking behind that meeting.
From the party that wanted to end NDIS and anything like it? Yes, she was just the axe for the job.
Ministries are handed out like prizes when the Coalition is in power. It's not about competence and doing a good job. It's about spoils and power. 
She's 60 years old... Life expectancy in Australia is 85... And you still want to give her a free pass because she "might change"?
I think the bitter old cunt is set in her ways, she lived her whole life like this, and I imagine she'll die a bitter hateful cunt
Come on, she brought out this photo to prove the rape, two years after it's supposed to have happened.  
"Why didn't you show that to the police?"  
"Oh, I only just found it on my phone!"  
"You told the police your phone got wiped when you factory reset it."  
"Oh, yeah, but it was in my iCloud account."  
"You accused your employer of using the machinery of the state to wipe your iCloud account, too."  
"Oh, er... well, maybe they only PARTIALLY wiped it?  I don't know how all this stuff works..."

To be clear, I think Lee J's explanation is probably right:  That a genuine victim of rape felt like her case was a bit lacking in evidence and decided to make some, but that doesn't prove that she wasn't raped.  But some of the things she alleged about her employer were pretty wild.
I do not want to give her a free pass, I hate what she is doing. I want her to stop hurting her victim. The quickest way is if she has an ahah moment and decides to stop being evil.

 I also want it made not possible for politicians, who  have protection against being sued, to intimidate their victims by suing so it cannot happen again.
Sadly, I think you are right.
