
Labor: we are going to limit your ability to make money, what do you think about it?  
Gambling: we don't like it.
Not from Australia, but here in the US gambling ads are everywhere and on everything. Reddit, Instagram, Facebook, YouTube, sports games, random billboards, disguised into video games for children, you name it.

Absolutely ridiculous.
Stinks of Liberal-lite.
I am massively anti gambling but I am surprised from what I’ve seen people are saying this isn’t far enough

Unless I’m mistaken this basically means the only time you can advertise gambling is after 10pm, twice an hour, and never during sport / anything you can actually gamble on

A 100% social media ban combined with no advertising an hour either side + during sport basically equates to a 99% reduction in gambling ads by viewership, right?
Nothing says open and transparent government more than NDA's for attending a briefing.

Trying to stop the public being informed, pretty poor behaviour
Hey remember how when the LNP was in power they sold us up the river to predatory industries then tried to force community advocates to sign NDAs so they couldn't tell everybody how badly our representatives fucked us? I'm so fucking glad we voted for change.
It shouldn't be a secret.  There is no military secrets or anything like that, which could jeopardise Australia's national security.  We publicly fund them, so it should all be public. None of this NDA garbage.  Anything from the government which doesn't harm national security should be under public scrutiny. Plain and simple.
[Gambling companies be like](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vAKPRGjkYsY)
The gambling companies apparently don't care that much about regulation, it's the media companies that are addicted to their advertising dollars
It's been that way for well over a decade here. You blokes are just playing catch up the last few years. As someone who follows US sports pretty heavily, it's been sad to see how it's filtered into your sports just like it has with ours
Australians on average loose more than twice as much per person a year than US citizens.  We have a serious problem.
US got it from Australia sadly... a lot of the same players pushing legal & social acceptance of gambling in the US over the past decade
It's the same in Australia.
It's the same here. It's at the stage where achool kids talk about betting odds on football.
We got tons of sports betting ads. Just not any pokies machine adds. They should honestly just get rid of pokies and stick then in the middle of the desert like USA and build a new city.
Tbh Labor has signed this anti lobbying money thing to get money from groups like this out of politics but it comes into effect after this next election cycle. In all honesty I don’t think any government is going to take a risk like and outright ban till that is in action.
Exactly right. This is what I imagine Dutton leading the country would look like. Very disappointing.
Labor just have to be a tad better than LNP under the current system
Both sides don’t want to upset there political donations
You might be forgetting how stinky the libs actually are.
What's the problem with requiring an NDA in this situation?
>But I am surprised from what I’ve seen people are saying this isn’t far enough

The reason for this is that there is no ‘too far’. The complete banning of gambling advertising is absolutely in the public interest. Gambling is harmful on a huge scale, and there is no reasonable question of that. If reductions in gambling advertising mitigate that harm, may as well ban it entirely. 

Why leave a little window open here or there for that harm? For whose benefit??
I think it is twice an hour before 10pm.
Haven't read a great deal into these things but I think people just want the same rules that are applied to cigarettes/smoking to apply to gambling
I imagine that "ads" is going to have a very specific meaning, from what I can guess will only mean advertisements during commercials breaks. I imagine things like sponsorships, banners, commentators announcing odds and shit like that will be excluded from that ban despite being way more insidious, sinister and frequent.

Labor need an NDA because its pretty evident they only listened to the gambling lobby and refused to take into account of actual evidence.
Twice an hour before 10pm, as much as you want after 10pm
We have the same bans on alcohol and nicotine but somehow gambling gets a free pass. 
Why should we have gambling ads at all?
Stinks of an agreed compromise, so obviously the gambling industry is ok with it.  

Probably figure 2 per hour before 10pm is enough to sell their product but handily restricts competition and marketing spend between bookies.
> people are saying this isn’t far enough

Totally true, but infinitely better that no actions at all
Yeah it’s a good change, and as much as I’d like it to go further, I’ll take what I can get.
Because gambling is a vice and vices don't really need much advertisement to continue finding new customers.
So the number of ads I see will reduce by .01% - in case I accidentally catch one on live tv in the two seconds before I open Netflix on my TV
Yeah really hoping they don’t make the perfect the enemy of the good on this
It is reasonable to require confidentiality if they're not ready to announce these policies / measures publicly. For example, they may want specific stakeholder consultation before they finalise the policies themselves. 

This whole thing is a massive overreaction.
It's standard practise for most professional organisations to have an NDA whenever organisations meet. Like every new client meeting will have pleasantries and then NDAs exchanged and witnessed. Usually there is an NDA signoff sent prior to physical meeting.

Not sure maybe the NGOs lack experience in a professional environment?
In 2017 there was legislation introduced to limit online sports betting advertising on tv. In 2016 the were 374 sports betting tv ads on tv every day. The restrictions did nothing and by 2021 online sports betting ads had risen to 948 on tv everyday. 

  
It's disappointing the ALP isn't doing more but what they are doing is much much better that anything the LNP had done to improve the situation.
My shopping trolley - murdered
Heh, heh.
Most of their customers are probably baked in.
Not sure there's any facts to back up that claim.  
Advertising means more customers which means more money.  
If regulation reduces advertising then money is affected.
Because Australians have pokies - nothing to do with sports gambling
Given the media landscape, they actually have to be a shitload better than the LNP to survive.
I'd rather they actually try, because all that's going to happen next year is Murdoch's Mafia will rile against Labor and convince our anti-intellectual population that they are the sole cause of all the problems as of late.

Even though Labor hasn't done anything about it, Liberals will be worse, but they'll scoot into power because your average voter doesn't understand how preferential voting works and doesn't realise you can indeed put a third party first. Then Labor will have a do-nothing single-issue term as a legacy which will make it harder for them to get in again.
They just have to be a tad better than the next LNP government will be, they can (and will) be exactly as shit as the last LNP government was.
Didn't read the article then?
Exactly, especially, if as costello(?) claims, it's already out there. They obviously don't mean anything then, do they, or, do they?
Exactly. Advertising exists to broaden a consumer base. We (as a society) don't benefit from increasing the number of smokers or gamblers, so why allow ads for them?
While I'm all for the complete removal of gambling advertising I'm also open to achieving that in the most effective and overall efficient manner possible. I wonder if the scorched earth, complete ban approach is going to meet so much aggressive resistance that it will either take far longer to implement or fail altogether thus allowing people to be harmed continuously, where as steady and constant winding back of their ability to advertise over time would result in a reduction in harm now that will increase over time with less resistance. I guess the flip side is that the rolling back of advertising would have to be maintained with constant momentum to avoid it either stalling or being reversed with a change of government to a party more sympathetic to betting agencies.

A reduction in ~90% of viewership is a huge reduction in harm with a view to reducing the rest as that becomes the norm as opposed to accepting nothing less than 100%, failing to achieve that, and having nothing change.
Spot on. This is such a cut and dry issue that the fact the government is “compromising” tells you everything you need to know about what’s going on behind the scenes. There is zero public benefit to allowing gambling ads, and a mass of evidence of the negative benefits. Why then is it being allowed to remain at all?
There is a bit of nuance you're leaving out. This isn't set in stone forever, nothing is stopping the final 2 ads per hour from being banned eventually.

If gambling and media companies will agree to this but oppose the complete ban, why start that fight? Why jeopardise the next election and the work to presumably come on health, education, cost of living, housing etc in 2025-2028 to turn a gambling ad ban from 98% effective to 100% effective?
And then as much as you want afterwards
Did we start with complete bans for those?
Why should we have any ads at all?
I agree, I’m just saying it’s SO bad at the moment that it’s almost funny how over the top it is
still works to normalise gambling amongst kids watching sports. got to get in and set that view in them early, when they can see two teams and all the sideline board at big sporting events promoting gambling.

i keep telling the kids imagine how much profit they make from every victim if they are spending that much to try and get you in
> o obviously the gambling industry is ok with it.  

Then why start a fight with them? They are incredibly powerful and this also impacts News Corp/9/7 income massively. Why get greedy and pick a fight over a tiny change on an otherwise fantastic bill?
Why is doing nothing a relevant metric though?
Why? The senate crossbench wants to vote for a full ban, the public want a full ban, why make any concessions?
You’re preaching to the choir, I’m just saying that we’ve had basically 0 regulation so reducing it by 90% is a pretty good start

I’m keen to see the entire of the proposed changes
This is often said when the pursuit of "perfect" risks the failure of "good".

But does that apply here?

Isn't Labor basically government? Isn't the only barrier that separates us from "perfect" just them growing a pair and implementing "perfect"? What does this piss weak NDA tell us about their ability to grow a pair? They can't even communicate openly now?
But how is essentially letting these groups continue to operate with just more restrictions good though? How is this result good for anyone but the gambling companies. Perfect would be policy that just removes the problem of gambling entirely. Good would be to stop giving these companies airtime in the media. They can still operate but their ability to normalize themselves is hamstrung. 

Gambling is so entrenched here that just limiting how often ads appear isn't going to really do much, it needs to disappear, so that gambling is never associated with enjoying things like sport which is exactly what these ads are designed to do. It essentially needs to feel abnormal or a major luxury to have a multi each week, and in some cases over multiple sports. Of course gambling companies will never let that happen willingly because it would send their entire business under, which really indicates how much they rely on what would otherwise be considered a being normalized. If these companies are agreeing to this, then its not going far enough, because good here has to directly impede them on something these companies will never willingly commit too. Perfect is frankly banning them entirely, good would be really hurting their ability to operate.
The senate crossbench wants a full ban, why do we need compromise? You're saying Labor are the bad guys? That's true
There's no 'commercial in confidence' here though. The government even make a habit of drip feeding policy ideas prior to things like the budget, to garner public reaction, and then withdraw them from the announcement should they come across as unpopular.

If you read the article, the group claims they've never been asked to sign one in 30 years.
[deleted]
There's a new batch turning 18 each day.
But when the big players have all the market share, why let your competitors advertise and steal your business? Their ambivalence is self serving
There is a cost in changing in the sense that while they will gain votes but they will also lose votes. They can’t really predict where they will be.

At the moment they still think they got a lead so they don’t have incentive to do desperation policies (like the conscription one from Sunak in the uk) yet. Just keep plodding along and don’t touch existing cheese placements and try and win the next election.

What? Did you say governing for the people? Sorry that is way down the list. Election winning is always number 1, and because it is number 1, campaign funding is probably number 2, that’s the main problem with fighting gambling lobbies
"You gotta vote for me! Otherwise things will get even worse!" - ALP pollie after 3 years of failing to make the country better in any way whatsoever.
I did. The best explanation seemed to be that Costello hadn't encountered one before (lol). Some of the other explanations seemed to be misconceived: that the NDA would prevent them from discussing publicly available information (they don't do this). 

Happy for a better explanation if you have one.
I assume Labor want to keep some aspects of it confidential for now, but yes if the information is publicly available already the NDA is pointless. 

The NDA also almost certainly says that it doesn't apply to information in the public domain (basically all NDAs say this).
Because we are a democracy and the overwhelming majority of people don’t want gambling ads on TV.
Because I don’t have a choice? What concessions am I making? I’m happy that progress has been made, and will continue to vote in favour of further progress in the future.
Labor stans still think the coalition are in power. I don't understand why they campaign for Labor if they don't want Labor to do things
I think if they are taking on the gaming lobby then they need to be all on the same page. I sometimes feel NGOs underestimate the power of the other lobby groups, Australia couldn't even get a decent mining tax with a majority government. The gaming lobby and casino's are ridiculously powerful and the government would be lucky to get anything done in that space.
If they are floating ideas then they will want to be able to discuss a range of options and implementation options. The reality is that the government won't necessarily be able to implement every option discussed and if those options were leaked then they would be attacked by the gaming lobby immediately. I don't think it's ideal for governments to use NDA's but I can understand it in this instance.
But it's what you have to do in client meetings in the private sector! So clearly these NGOs are inexperienced! /s
If you read the article you'll see this:

>The Albanese government has been criticised for applying non-disclosure agreements to a range of confidential consultations including the national disability insurance scheme, religious discrimination bill and environmental reforms.

Perfectly normal it seems.
One argument that can be made is too much misinformation going around on the Internet.The briefing is NDA, probably just to get feedback.

Why not just wait till we get the information on what will be officially released to the public.
I'm kind of disappointed in this government as being liberal lite. It would be good get rid of the gambling ads but I think we have to be realistic about what this government can actually achieve.
Still not sure where you are getting that info from.  
They advertise even if their competitors advertise.  
Its hasn't been stopped yet.  
Your logic that they don't care because no-one will be able to advertise is a bit off.
Well they’re not even gonna win the election so it’ll just be a wasted term
Dunno what country you are living in but here in Australia we have seen huge improvement over scomo, no robodebts, no weekly corruption scandals, no Scott Morrisson.
I'm not happy with the rate of change, but to claim things haven't changed changed for the better is wilful ignorance at best.
I've worked in many orgs that have done political advocacy, never have we had to sign an NDA for a government briefing before.

Edit: not sure why I'm getting downvoted for something that is based on 20 years of advocacy that has probably improved the lives of those doing the downvoting. Ignorance.
Making comments here defending it. Democracy doesn't start and end on election day. Write to your MP for starters

>The gaming lobby and casino's are ridiculously powerful and the government would be lucky to get anything done in that space.

The answer is simple: the government doesn't have to listen to the gambling lobby.
It's really only one part of the gambling industry that this will impact. Responsible Wagering Australia is the online gambling lobby stacked with former pollies from both sides of politics that will have been delaying this. 

All other forms of gambling have far harsher advertising restrictions from the interactive gambling act 2001 including clubs with pokies and casinos. These parts of the industry don't like competition taking market share and would have been pushing for an online sports betting advertising ban.  


State governments are conflicted since introducing point of consumption taxes and it seems like other industries like the AFL would have been delaying the ban so they can sell rights for a better price.
I agree with you except for the last sentence - what is everyone's problem with NDAs ITT? Are you thinking about it from an optics perspective?
True, but one of their key campaign pledges was transparency, and it can be argued that they're definitely failing at that, with widespread use of NDA's, and FOI backlogs that they may not get to for years
A recent Crikey article, I assume they have their sources
The thing is if you vote in the LNP then it is almost certain that the gambling ads will become mOre rampant, not less. 

Labor knows it too so they are just pretending they are working on something, and that is already better than the LNP by a country mile
No duplicate ministers
I love that half of the "huge improvements" you can think of are literally just "we've got a new prime minister!"
Ok, can you name one thing the Labor government has done better than an LNP government would have in their place? I mean, coal and gas projects have been approved left right and centre, there's been no prosecutions from Robodebt, they've been giving political and material support to genocide in Gaza, Brittany Higgins is still being hounded in the courts... what would PM Dutton have done differently here?
If gambling agencies have an NDA - good practice - then it stands to reason anti-gambling agencies will too.

You just say everyone will get one then nobody is targeted.
Did you read the article? It's common for them to ask groups being briefed before things are officially announced to sign an NDA. 

Look how much damage the leaks have caused already. What should be seen as a ban on gambling ads online, removing gambling ads from sport, and restricting ads to 2 per hour at all other times is being portrayed as somehow giving gambling companies what they want.
Because it is basically common practice to sign an NDA when discussing things with the Government. To never have done so, in over 20 years, stretches credulity.
Ok. In this case, it was required. What is the issue?
They have to get re-elected though, and the mining lobby replaced Kevin Rudd when he wanted to impose the mining tax. Also look overseas where Biden was told to leave by democratic financial donors. Albo is very frightened of these lobbies especially with our current media landscape that wishes to replace him with Dutton.
Ideally a government is accountable to its constituents and an NDA restricts accountability. However there are going to be national security issues that need secrecy and government brainstorming sessions that require non disclosure. I think in this case it seems an NDA is prudent.
Nothing stopping people from showing up and as far as we know the NDA is just for the briefing.
Hear, hear - to all of that.
Workplace / labour law reforms on things like pay transparency, wage theft etc.

Somewhat better efforts on climate change / emissions with the legislation they put in with the greens last year.

Economically things like Stage 3 tax cut changes (depending on your position on the changes haha), they're pegging HECS to WPI/CPI, first surplus in 15yrs (which is inherently anti-inflationary).

Had their referendum, even if they failed it was on their list of shit to do.

I can't think of anything particularly positive about the Morrison government, but it was a while back and I'm sure there has to be a few things they did right. Or at least not completely wrong.
Did you see the last one? I would have voted for an inanimate carbon rod.
43% reduction minimum target for reduction in emissions.

Overhauled (overhauling?) the NDIS

Banned sheep live exports

Legislated the right to disconnect

Changed family leave to double the amount provided to people

Torpedoed a huge amount of political capital trying to pass the voice

Established a high speed rail authority

Established the HAFF

Banned credit cards and digital payment methods for gambling

Implemented legislation for making sure we meet our obligations regarding international shipping and not dumping pollution once ships leave Australian waters

Introduced the NACC

Introduced world leading legislation for making multinationals reveal their subsidiary companies, meaning tax transparency globally has dramatically improved.

Not a comprehensive list by any means, but there's a huge and obvious difference between the ALP and LNP. You having no idea what you're talking about doesn't change that.
I'm typically a greens voter until someone even more left comes along. But there are a ton of examples. Completely removing the AAT is a good one. 

I do 100% hate the mine approvals.
They passed a tax cut that benefited 95% of Australians . 
> If gambling agencies have an NDA - good practice - then it stands to reason anti-gambling agencies will too.

I totally agree.

> You just say everyone will get one then nobody is targeted.

And it avoids the situation where a party who didn’t sign the NDA can freely discuss the issue in the media (anti-gambling organisations) and a party who did sign the NDA can't respond or comment under threat of being sued (members of the gambling industry). You have to treat all parties the same way.
Yes I read the article. I then shared my experience.
You know how advocacy, lobbying and campaigning works right?
Because its fundamentally undemocratic
Yeah nothing stopping people from dropping everything, not attending work just to attend a government briefing in hopes of attaining the promised transparency we were offered as a cornerstone of this current government
Do those 95% of Australians not need functioning schools or hospitals?
By respecting confidentiality?
Wait, we don't get to vote anymore?

Clutch those pearls tighter.
Can you explain this? It is a bit vague. 

I'll try to explain myself a bit better too: 

An NDA temporarily preserves confidentiality of sensitive non-public information.

An NDA does not stop people from ever talking about something once it is made public (which is perhaps a misconception that this article is spreading). 

Government needs to be able to work on things before they're made public sometimes. If you're inviting external parties (such as the NGOs etc) to be briefed on something before it goes public, the way to do so is to implement an NDA.

This isn't really a political thing. This is standard practice for sophisticated organisations. If you (and others) have been attending briefings without NDAs (or equivalent) protections in place, it may be that the information wasn't confidential, or that the relevant government(s) (at that time) were not doing so. 

I can't work out what the harm is here.
You mean typical business hours Monday to Friday.

Are you trying to tell me the government now has to work around other people's calendars and cater to each and everyone time schedules?

Biggest brain dead argument I have heard this week.
Are you arguing Labor should have done nothing and left the liberal tax cuts in place?
Or there’s this magical thing called the internet with which they convey information people can consume without leaving their houses…hell, they could even utilise their professional communications staff to, I don’t know, communicate it to the public using means other than a face to face meeting… pretty obvious stuff really
So the best we can hope for from Labor is Liberal policies for tax cuts and underfunded public services, but watered down a bit? 
Once the reforms are finalized, sure it will be made public and you will have all the details. Why make public unfinished work, testing the waters is a very valid strategy in a closed environment.
