
I remember how fucking expensive bananas got after Cyclone Yasi and we didn't import bananas we just sucked it up and paid or didn't get bananas. 

As far as I know this should be the same thing. It isn't like people need pineapples as a staple. And I love a good fresh pineapple.
>But an undersupply in the domestic market after a tumultuous few years has piqued the interest of international growers.

Undersupply? It was only last year this happened...

> A mass natural flowering event is causing an industry-wide glut of pineapples

https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2023-01-30/queensland-pineapple-glut-hurting-farmers-add-to-costs/101906266
I always check my fruit nowadays. There's no reason we can't eat Australian grown fruit and veg. 

I remember when Woolworth tried to start stocking USA oranges, fortunately they went on sale and haven't seen them since. 

Considering the transportation and logistics costs, it's insane to think the USA would be cheaper. Probably saving 0.01cents per orange. There were still plenty of AU oranges next to it for a reasonable price at the time, too. 

Fresh fruit, veg, and meat is like the last thing in Australia that isn't dominated by foreign mega corps. Let us at least keep that you scumbag woollies and Coles.
The linked article talks about the flowering event:  
  
> "A mass natural flowering event early in 2023 caused a glut of pineapples on the Australian market, where tonnes of fresh fruit was left to rot in fields as farmers could not pick as fast as they ripened."  
  
> "It takes two years to grow a pineapple, and after the glut growers were left with fewer pineapples than planned, causing an undersupply."
That's as may be but pineapples are also grown in the NT, northern New South Wales and Western Australia, so I'm always dubious about "undersupply" discussions. It's usually just a way to edge into the Australian market. As the first commenter said, it's hardly a staple. Also anecdotally they are always plentiful at my local fruito and they are currently retailing at $3.99. Shouldn't the price be higher if they were scarce?
They're $2 a pop at the local famer's market. Shortage, my arse.
It's a profit undersupply...
I know right!
