Employees of Coles - Do you know why they aren't stocking Somat dishwashing products anymore? 

I have found them on Amazon, so not a total loss. 

I don't need to be sold on dishwasher powder, or the economics of one thing over another. I like the pods because they have been the only ones that don't leave an odour at the end.

Thanks for curing my curiosity.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
I can't answer your question, but it would be one of two reasons.

1) Coles weren't selling enough to warrant them stocking it.

2) The manufacturer no longer makes it.

I see Woolies aren't' selling it, but IGA do.  Unfortunately, every time I can only find my favourite item at IGA and not Colesworth, that item stops being produced.  My only suggestion is to start stocking up on it.
Woolworths here have advertised Somat, and it is on the shelves.

I usually purchase from Amazon, but, plastics. The plastic disintegrates and we end up with more microplastics in circulation.

I also look on Ozsale for clearance specials of other dishwasher tabs, last box of Finish i got 180 tabs for $23.
The coles near me still have them but they are over with the bulk and general merch stuff.
Woolworths used to carry their own line of pods which were great but they seem to have stopped making them.
It will be discontinued when it’s run out. Stock up while you can.
Because dishwasher tablets are stupidly expensive in Australia and supermarkets only stock the most expensive brands.
Finish 0% tablets are fragrance free, so are Ecostore Sensitive (Ecostore often on sale at Chemist Warehouse). I’m like you and hate the unnecessary smell. 
Get the Aldi ones, cheap as fuck and do a great bloody job
If you’re not prepared to talk about any other products, why are you even posting here? Why not just ask Cokes yourself?
The whole range of Somat stuff is showing as deleted on our system (IGA). The last sales were in Feb- Apr.
Well, I'm posting here because I have a question that I thought an employee could answer. 

Why should I " be prepared" to talk about other products? Just a simple answer will suffice.

I have only just realised it when I went to do an online shop. If I was in the store, I'd ask. 

It's not difficult. Do you spend your days trying to sound edgy?
Doesn't surprise me.  That means that Somat has stopped making this range.  Which seems to happen a lot when ColesWorth stop stocking it.
