
“Breaking…. Skateboarder said she was ‘stoked’”. In all seriousness, how bloody awesome is that. The commentators were so happy for her, the passion for Australia is so good. We are only small in comparison to these countries but we are super proud
First woman to pull of a 900 and did it at 14. She is awesome!
What a great athlete to watch. She nailed her second run where a lot of the competition had bailed, so she absolutely went for it on the last run and added two new tricks.  
All this and she's more of a vert skater!
Hell yeah, what a legend!
Incredible. Happy for her and her family, was such a fun event to watch (the 11-year old Chinese competitor!!).

And she kicked us up to 3rd in the medal tally!
Just get her a pet duck!
fuck yeah man. woman's skateboarding has come so far. so stoked for what the future holds for it.
Trew Blue.
Absolute legend!
What a little legend
One thing I saw was that the competitors really seemed to have a good time skating together, like they'd been hanging out all week becoming friends.
Listening to her interview this morning made this crusty middle aged woman smile and happy cry in her way to work. Such focus and beautiful energy. 

Congratulations Arisa, don’t ever stop being you. 

You’re a wonderful role model.  I hope your peer group admire and are as inspired by you as I am.
Man, stoked for her. 
But I know exactly what her parents are like. Seen it at the skato so much. Gotta feel sorry for her on that front.
She is more eloquent and comfortable answering questions than 99% of soccer interviews i have watched. What a lovely person and what an achievement. 
Man I hope we get an update on that duck
Amazing stuff. Between this and the BMX the other night, its great to see the news actually reporting other sports as much they overly fixate on swimming and only the swimming. In the first week, there were so many great Aussie stories that was not making the news.
May her parents buy her all of the ducks (well, maybe not all of them..)
Something to brag about to your 7 year class mates!
So clean, what a sick run.
rip in the grommets!!
Crack out the sum 41 and offspring tunes for her while she skateboards to the gold medal
The Japan Gold Silver and bronze is a funny one
She also said "brang"! And yeah, she answered all these questions like holding a routine press conference. 14yo me couldn't even recite a poem in front of the class.
We are small of population yet mighty in spirit and class.
Kickflipped us up to third.
I got a little teary when I watched her win. Everyone was so nice to each other and she looked so happy. Absolute legend.
Yeah. She answers questions using 'full sentence answers'.
LOl. Me too. I can't even roller skate on a flat surface. Skateboard. Impossible for me.

Brilliant for her though. I love the Olympics when we win a medal in other sports as well as swimming.
Brang is the aussie slang for brought
We have our fair share of wankers but I definitely agree with this
Ta cobby. I brought an Aussie slang dictionary but it was very furphy.
