
>skort

Very 90s.
I don't think you're gonna have much luck with refund or exchange now. Probably OK to chuck it in the bin.
Terminator 2 Figs?
Interesting. The 2 pack of pens are now 95¢ and basic thongs are $5.
Bloody Whitties mate. So much nicer than Joondies.
Oh wow.  What a find.  None of our current receipts last 32 days, not 32 years.  And I see they're closed Sundays.
At Whitties too! Back then that shopping centre looked pretty damn different. Action instead of Coles, no food court or cinemas or any of that nonsense. Underground carpark? Nuh uh. Shit, that was over 30 years ago. Top place to wag school
Do you still have the terminator figurines?
That terminator 2 figurine is probably worth a heap now.
Skort and shirt on clearance, in the days before barcode scanners
Matching tulip skort and shirt sounds peak 90s!
And closed on Sundays. Bring that back.
These days the receipt would be like 5x long.
Thong footbed!!
What Terminator 2 figurines did you get?

I remember having some sort of power glove-esque Terminator arm during that period that you could wear, including having seperate internal pulleys for controlling each individual figure
My Nan lived near that Whitfords Big W in 92...and now I feel sad and nostalgic. Back then it felt like an outer suburb of Perth, but not today with our urban sprawl
Before G.S.T and would have inclued Sales Tax. Likely would have been a little cheaper after G.S.T.
i do love a good skort
Back when you could get fresh Terminator 2 figs!
The numbers seem so random. $10.01, $0.43, $7.52, especially considering the 1c piece was withdrawn at the beginning of '92
perfect example of “if it works, don’t fix it” mentality with the receipts size/format 👏👏
I just found a box of receipts from 2020 and they have all literally faded to invisible.
I sold your receipt to google. They paid me 12c.
Look at the quality of the print and paper, it was probably manufactured in Australia!
We can tell it's '92 because you paid cash.
have lots from the childhood in the very late 90s. good times.
Well look at you in your matching Tulip print shirt and skort!

No GST either.
Only just getting round to filing their 92/93 tax return.
They stopped doing refunds/exchanges?
Yeah, branded figs. Had a pic of the Terminator on the bag saying "eat too much and I'll be back"
[deleted]
It was a treat to go to Whitfords back in the day because Mum wanted to do the shopping at Action (they had better fish than ColesWorths). The food court was so much better than Lakeside. It had a KFC, and that Earl of Sandwich place. I haven't been back to Perth for a decade but I've heard that Lakeside is unrecognisably fancy now.
Because those registers used ink ribbons while today's ones are thermal
even the dockets were better quality back then smh
That deli that used to be (roughly) where the Maccas is now.
According to eBay, around $150, unopened.
I was just thinking - how nice for the staff being closed Sundays 🥲
"Come with me if you want 2 figs."
Pretty sure the receipt being older than Methuselah pretty much rules it out.

Besides, I reckon 32 year old choc peanuts are gonna be pretty manky and hard to prove manufacturers defect on by now1
My personal favourite was the T1000 that exploded when you pushed a button on his back.
According to eBay, around $150, unopened.
Yep, that's why our current ones don't last.
Totally agree.  All in the name of cost saving.
most of the shift workers i’ve met want to work on Sundays for the extra pay (including myself when i was shift work) but i do agree it’d be nice for the full time staff
My bad. I was reading that pretty fast, and assumed BIG W stopped doing exchanges/refunds lol
It's very impressive if you find one that has yet to decompose.
Probably intentional, can't take it back if you can't read the receipt. I also hate it these days how you are always asked if you want a receipt, even if it's something that could be faulty. Of course I want a receipt for it
Alot of people legitimately say no to a receipt when asked.
Yep.  I've even taken photos of receipts recently.  It would be grand if all places just emailed or texted receipts.
I'm talking about stuff where you obviously need a receipt cause the thing you are buying might not work.
Personally, I always ask for a receipt.  Don't understand these people who get their knickers twisted when they either don't ask for a receipt or toss it as the register then are asked at the door to see their receipt.
