Hi, 

Has anyone ever done a hirevue interview for Testra for this role? Or something similar? For what I heard its 6 questions and 4 games. 

Does anyone know what the questions are? 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Hey mate,

Just finished up 24 years in Telstra, including being on the other side of a hirevue process (it's pretty new in Telstra (as in 2-3 years, I'm old)). Disclaimer - I've never been in HR, just around the traps for a long while.

Can't speak for this specific role, but as a general rule, Telstra's big on the good ole behavioural interview questions. If I was asked to come up with a couple, these are the ones that just roll out of my head straight away as standards;

* Can you tell me about a time when you had a demanding customer and how you dealt with the situation?

* Tell us about a time when you've had competing priorities. How did you manage them?

* Tell us about a time you've received negative feedback. How did you respond?

Particularly given it's for a retail role, it'll be pretty generic, as they're not expecting you to know anything about Telstra's systems etc. The focus will instead all be on how you would deal with customers.

I know this will sound super basic, but really really stick to STAR (situation, task, action, result) interview techniques - it's what you'll get marked on.

To give some insight into how it looks on their side, there will be an interview panel, but the advantage (for them) of using Hirevue is they don't all have to meet at the same time. Instead, they'll get a notification to go into the system and watch each of your responses, then get a chance to give it a star rating, as well as make some notes. When all of the panel has done that, it spits out the best applicants and the panel can give the go ahead (or not) on each. In my experience, there was still a fair bit of "yeh, this guys' answer to this was rough, but I liked them overall better", but that would come down to who was on the panel and how well they knew each other.

Other basic, basic thing I would say is to make sure your video/audio is up to snuff. Kick everything else off the network, use a good quality headset rather than room audio, make sure your lighting looks right and for the love of god, clean up whatever is in the background!

As for the games, I've not been across that as I wasn't in the retail space, but from what I gather, they're more focused on basic maths - while you're pretty unlikely to be handling money these days, you'll still need to be able to look at a bill with a customer and explain it, so having some sense of how things add up/divide monthly is going to be important.

Best of luck and let us know how you go!
If you can not listen to customers, do nothing to help solve their problems, but just upsell accessories with phone purchases, you’ll be perfect for the job!

Good luck.
These Telstra stores are the worst thing to have happened in the retail telco space ever. The horrendous advice of their staff actually generate me income as a technician, so it's a love/hate relationship. I suggest never working for them, you'll be a shifty lying salesmen within two weeks.
Thanks for this, I'm not sure whether you know the answer to this or not but the other issue is I got the invite yesterday and the job expires tomorrow. Do I need to get the Hirevue interview done before it expires?
Do you mean that the job expires on the job board? If that's all, wouldn't worry.


However, Hirevue does have an option to limit when applications are received, so if that expiry date is in the invite link, then yeh, it'll be before that time.


Another tip - read very carefully the instructions about how many attempts you can make at a question, that can be very limited too, so be aware of what you can do (should be in the instructions as you apply too).
I can confirm the job expires tomorrow. They do advise to do the Hirevue as soon as possible to help speed up the process, but there nothing saying that you can't do it after this date. 

I did run a test of the system, so I do have an idea how it works.
