
In the notes from the Guardian's updates we've had the following just in defence from her (unprompted from any cross-examination) 

* Reynolds claimed it's understandable that she interviewed a alleged rape victim in the room she was raped because "there were no other rooms in Parliament" (dubious claim, you could go anywhere else)
* She wasn't allowed to defend herself by the government (not sure how this is Higgins' fault)
* So Reynolds "defended herself" by reporting Britney to the Anti-Corruption Commission.
* Higgins' media storm led to the death of another minister (dubious claim)
* Reynolds cannot remember calling her a "lying cow" (so claims her own memory of how she let Britney down)
* She felt hard-done by and overwhelmed by the negative reporting of her (which would be understandable as negative actions would be reported negatively).

Either The Guardian is reporting this incredibly one-sided or Reynolds is a complete utter idiot and thinks a sob-story is enough even though she did fail her own staffer at work. 


Fundamentally the opening day or so her claims are "Britney was mean to me online a few times by highlighting how poorly I treated her and continue to treat her".

It all appears to come down to there major work-cover incident at work and the immediate boss tried to deal with it themselves poorly, the company paid out to "deal with it" and the immediate boss doesn't agree with it and would rather shoot at the victim rather than her shitty company and is upset the victim is firing back.
Considering she called Higgins a "Lying Cow", I would think any statements of he lack of empathy would be spot on.
Am I the only one who thinks she has a face like a squeezed lemon?

Rancid old cow.
Next time someone makes one of those infographics on why victims don't report I hope they include Reynolds' face
She reminds me of Eric Cartman having a tantrum.
Reynolds retracted her :Lying Cow" statement. [https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-03-12/linda-reynolds-retracts-lying-cow-comment-brittany-higgins/13242902](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-03-12/linda-reynolds-retracts-lying-cow-comment-brittany-higgins/13242902)

If she didn't make the comment, why would she retract it, and apologise?
>Reynolds claimed it's understandable that she interviewed a alleged rape victim in the room she was raped because "there were no other rooms in Parliament" (dubious claim, you could go anywhere else)

Who knew that the Parliament was so small that there is only one room in the entire fucking building. It's like the reverse TARDIS.
She’s also shown she has a child like understanding of confidentiality. She didn’t think documents were confidential because she didn’t sign them. Slightly concerning for a former minister of defence.
This does not sound good for Reynolds. I wonder what comes out during cross-examination.
> So Reynolds "defended herself" by reporting Britney to the Anti-Corruption Commission.

This response by Ms Reynolds to The damages payout appears to be what prompted Ms Higgins’ first social media post which was construed as defamatory by Ms Reynolds, but it’s hard to see how it was defamatory. This program is worth a listen, particularly given their legal qualifications  - 

https://www.abc.net.au/listen/programs/latenightlive/richard-ackland-linda-reynolds-brittany-higgins/104186518
> So Reynolds "defended herself" by reporting Britney to the Anti-Corruption Commission

Ummm she reported the matter- eg the government, not the complainant. When the basis of ~$2.5mil of the public's money is paid out without any input from the respondent, it's prudent to at least have a look under the hood. Based on Justice Lee's findings, one of the cornerstones of the complaint seemed without merit.
She has resting smug face. Every expression looks so smug.
Reynolds looks like a poorly drawn South Park character.
A very self-satisfied one.
She also paid $11,000 to BH lawyer and at BH request, sentv$10,000 to a woman’s shelter.
SIDRAT
Prayer room was booked by other Liberals and sex workers doing consensual questionable things.
The standard for all the Libs at the time..Can anyone still remember Engadine ScoMo?
