Hi team I’m thinking of switching to Boost Mobile because my Optus phone coverage is bad. Anyone using it have any feedback on it? I.e. coverage; ease of topping up; customer service; eSIM or physical sim.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Boost are basically Telstra full service, so they have excellent coverage. Customer service is pretty average as for all telcos but you can also go into a Telstra shop for some things. Their $270/yr plan was fucking amazing but they're scrapping that - the $300/yr plan isn't awful though (works out $25/month for 270GB for the year) if you're not going to be using a *lot* of mobile data *and* need full service.

ALDI Mobile is a Telstra MVNO and probably a bit better value than Boost, but it's also the Telstra wholesale network which isn't *quite* as good as the full Telstra network - but it's still going to be better than Optus.
There are three tiers of access to the Telstra Mobile network.

Tier 1 is reserved for Telstra's own direct customers.

Tier 2 is the entire Telstra network, but with data speed caps. Boost Mobile is the only Telstra reseller on this tier.

Tier 3 is Telstra Wholesale. It includes most, but not all, of the Telstra network - some locations, primarily in remote are, are not included. Aldi, Belong, Exetel, Mate, Woolworths and a few others are in this tier.

I've been on Boost for many years and I'm super happy with their coverage, at much lower than Telstra's prices. Their 12 month prepaid option is amazing value, but get in quick before it gets cancelled in October.
I think boost uses the telstra network so if you know someone using telstra that may give you some insight into what sort of coverage you would get.
I've been on boost for years. Fantastic coverage, only time I have bad coverage is one sweet spot in my building at work, but also I've been on the opposite end where I've been in the middle of no where and been the only one with reception.

I did have a friend make a switch over to them recently, using an esim and they absolutely butchered the switching process and he was without his phone number or data for over a week.
I use Boost. It is better than Optus when I  visit my family in the NT. There are however spots up there that no provider manages to reach.

I have found Boost to be actually really good all up. 

The only thing  is that at my local shopping centre (which is *very* close to the Sydney CBD) has several dead zones, whereas with Optus I managed to get really good reception in that shopping centre. My partner is having the same issue with Boost in that area.

Otherwise,  I have thought it going well and will stick with them.
Boost coverage is great but they jacked the price too high, data allowance went up too but I still don't use half of it.
I was on Aldi but I now live in regional NSW and travel a lot to Sydney. I had to switch because Aldi is only 4G and it drops out between Bathurst and the blue mountains. Otherwise it was super cheap, 7g data for $17 per month. 

But now my circumstances have changed and I need heaps of data. So I got the 12mth Boost plan, 365g data for $365. I get better coverage when I’m travelling west and brief occasional very slow internet loading when I’m in inner city Sydney. Overall I’m satisfied
Wife uses them and they have been good but she'll likely switch away after the price increase.
I switched from Optus to Boost because anywhere out of a city Optus coverage is rubbish. Boost has been much better, and cheaper. If you are planning any travel ditch Optus.
I use Boost for personal and JB HiFi prepaid for work.

Boost was cheaper but is now increasing to match JB HiFi.

JB HiFi Prepaid

30GB for $39

30 day expiry

No esim

Currently, $15 in store

50GB on your 1st 3 recharges


Boost 

25GB for $39

28 day expiry

Esim available

75GB on activation
They've just jacked up their prices. If money is an issue, use Aldi Mobile - same network (Telstra), but cheaper.
Yeah I use it, can’t really complain. Except ease of topping up data, it’s taken me 30 mins before cuz of the app being retarded
Am on Boost, concur 100%
Unless you are travelling to extremely remote areas (think 4WD) it is rare to need the full Telstra/Boost coverage
I think JB Hifi and The Good Guys mobile also use the full telstra network now
Tier 1 and 2 are the same. Telstra prepaid and Boost have essentially  the same speed caps. $35 gets your 150mbps on both
Same network, but Aldi doesn't have full access, however unless you're crossing The Nullarbor you'll be fine.
>Aldi Mobile - same network (Telstra), but cheaper.

Wrong. Aldi uses a subset of the Telstra network.
Yeah, you’d think that, but Optus doesn’t even work in crookwell, which has a population of thousands.
I haven't travelled much since COVID, but there were lots of paved roads with no phone coverage at all, and 50 times that many with no Optus coverage, e.g. most of the non-highway roads west of Dubbo.

Edit: Thinking about it, I drove from Warwick to Lismore, via Killarney with a detour to Mt Lindsay two weeks ago. All paved roads, and quite a few cars and caravans. I know there was no internet coverage for the middle of the trip, as Google Maps stopped working, but I don't know if that means no phone as well.
They sell co-branded Telstra services, so yes.
Dead spots all over with Aldi vs Boost eg between Moora and Gerry. But if you want 100% coverage get a satphone.
Next time you go on a trip, download areas in google maps to your phone before you leave, so it just needs a GPS signal and not data.
I see
Yes. I wasn't expecting to go out of coverage. Dappled shadows and potholes made the road a bit tricky to drive, and I missed a turn, and went to Mt Lindsay by accident.
