
Peter Handc0ck (sorry, ridiculous 'community rules' don't allow his actual name to be posted), who was executed with Morant, is recorded on the Bathurst, NSW, memorial with the ‘unofficially’ added annotation (on a small brass plaque) 'Murdered by Kitchener.'
He has a movie, leave it at that. He wasn't a hero nor does he represent decency.
Seems as though the "lobbying" has been done by a lone distant-relative with the aid of a solicitor. 

Personally I can't imagine caring so much about a distant relative who carked it long before I was born that I would hassle councils to put his name on a plaque, but I guess we all need a hobby.
There are plenty of good people to celebrate in our history, they were war criminals and should be remembered as such
Are they being asked to celebrate Morant? Or just include his name in a list of fallen soldiers?

We need to remember our history, even the ugly side, lest we forget the lessons of war.
[deleted]
He was a war criminal and thus should not be on the memorial.

However the more egregious charge is that he was a Pom, and that alone should keep him far from any Aussie memorials.
Not to excuse his war crimes but in the scheme of things he was a fucking amateur.

Looking at various influential US presidential appointments / presidents.

Reagan, Kissinger, Rice, Rumsfeld,  Clinton, Bush, Bush, Albright and so on.

I'm sure I've missed plenty and don't need correcting, feel free to add your favorites though.
What’s the name of the movie?
Morant was a victim of political expediency. He deserves to be commemorated and remembered.
I would venture to suggest that Morant is probably one of the best remembered Boer War veterans but it doesn’t mean he should be memorialised alongside soldiers who weren’t executed for war crimes.
Luckily we have books to remember our history, even the ugly side.

Adding Morant to a memorial hounoring the fallen is not appropriate.
He was a convicted war criminal who murdered prisoners and civilians. He was not killed in the war.
Plenty of 'poms' on Australian war memorials.
There's plenty of "hero" war memorials that shouldn't be standing.
You know what you're right, I vote that we take Bush, Regan, and Clinton off all south Australia war memorials.
A bit off topic but alright
Breaker Morant
He's a war criminal who got what he deserved. It's not even a question of whether he did it or not.
Probably a fair call then really
I live in WA so no idea about this, do I like it, yes I fucking do.

Well played SA. I need to research this in WA.
Admittedly off topic on specifics but the theme is there.

No need to honor war criminals, as if war isn't bad enough.
Cheers
Morant was accused of the summary execution of Floris Visser, a wounded POW, and the slaying of four Afrikaners and four Dutch schoolteachers who had surrendered at the Elim Hospital, five of whom were members of the Soutpansberg Commando. Morant was found guilty and sentenced to death.
Reckon so.
