Are you telling me that the government has no real interest in lowering inflation and prefers to act out of self interest and to score win themselves a re-election? Well shit, I am shocked. Shocked I tells ya.

But by all means, let's demonise the RBA 

Say it with me people: WE NEED A RECESSION. We don't need Jim Chalmers ro give himself backpats for an energy relief that will have no meaningful impact on cost of living pressures 
>Are you telling me that the government has no real interest in lowering inflation and prefers to act out of self interest and to score win themselves a re-election?

I'll tell you that the electorate had the pitchforks out and would've rioted if the government didn't offer some relief.
Government policy raises inflation.  
RBA raise interest rates.
Government blames the RBA. 
Government then hand out subsidies and ask for a pat on the back. 
Subsidies further raise inflation.

Repeat the cycle.
Fiscal and monetary policy have been at odds for most of this economic cycle.
What I don't get is.. from what I understood inflation to be was. You print lots of money, so more is in circulation, so it's worth less? In simpleton terms. 

But we produced less, so dollar worth less in some terms from that, I assume too. Since it's worth has a lot to do with production. Services, goods, etc. 

But what I see in the retail space is... interest rates go up, less spending, retail store raises prices to cover loss profit percentages. Rents go up, less spending. Retail go up again. 

Essentially, retailers raise prices to make more money, and then, as individuals, this is how we suffer from inflation largely. 

So if at this point, we are headed towards recession because all the money is going into property, how does raises interest and putting even more money into bankers' pockets and homeloans, etc, reduce inflation?

I mean, at the end of the day, your dollar is worth what you can buy with it locally, and then I guess there is import/export and global worth in exchange rates. I don't have a clue about that. But locally speaking, this is what I see largely. 

And of course the circle of spending less, making less, increasing prices goes on? 

That's the best solution there is from our financial economic overlords?
Had government used the funding to increase energy supply it would likely have reduced consumer energy prices in future years having a deflationary effect. Government action tends to be inflationary but they can also act to limit inflation.


When you look back at the last three decades deflation has been driven by demographic and global factors. We had such immense deflationary pressure as women entering and staying in the workforce, we had the breakneck industrialisation of China offering low cost manufactured goods, fall of the USSR opening up energy markets and finally the collapse of the subprime mortgage bubble limiting credit expansion. It was such a unique confluence of factors needed to keep inflation so low for so long. It's very difficult to see how that dynamic will be repeated, most of these things are far outside the hands of governments.
If you want to stop inflation stop the RTO mandates.

It will consume more fuel and resources for people to spend money on the city. This will result in inflation.
Oh I agree. I just think the relief was in the wrong area, or I suppose, insufficient. $300 in the short term is small change compared to say, I don't know, a CGT change, Negative Gearing removal or redistribution of wealth amongst people after taxing the highest earners appropriately. 

I know I know, I'm a socialist. Shame on me for thinking Clive and Gina should pay their share, ditto Woodside and whoever else is raping our natural land and getting away with it
Every time someone deposits money in a bank,  the bank creates money. Printing money does not refer to actual printing of money. 

The federal government will have a deficit this year. Most state governments will have a deficit. This increases money supply. The savings from electricity rebates and tax cuts, lead to increased demand which may increase prices if supply can't match the increase in demand
RTO meaning Return to Office I'm guessing? If so, yeah, I don't think FT office work is really required anymore. Covid showed us that WFH is perfectly workable with a few checks and balances in place
>I don't know, a CGT change, Negative Gearing removal or redistribution of wealth amongst people after taxing the highest earners appropriately.

I don't mind these ideas. The way investment properties are taxed needs to change. On taxing high earners I'm at a point where I'd probably cave on income and consumption taxes (even though I think there are actually workforce participation benefits to more progressive income tax settings, and you end up needing to compensate poorer Australians for a higher consumption rate anyway), in exchange for appropriate wealth taxes and mining levies. Basically swallow whole-cloth whatever Ken Henry or Danielle Wood or whoever is proposing at this point, in the hopes that a compromise consensus can be built around it. Norway seems to have basically this kind of tax setup, it can't be too bad.

But the tax debate in Australia is frozen. The chances of anything being put forward and not getting the government of the day lynched are slim to nil.
