
This is how I used to eat them anyway

Fuck me I haven't had one of these in years. Might pick some up tomorrow
Did they change the recipe?  It's been many years since I've had one but they used to snap very consistently.
I never bother snapping. Same with Kit Kats. Just chomp straight into it.
I believe they dropped in quality after the extortion attempt and massive product recall in 1997, and subsequent buyout by Campbells, but I could be mistaken, that was a long time ago.
the snap  is overrated - you're eating it correctly
Modern problems require modern solutions.
They don’t make them like they used to.
Tea dunking is so underrated. I used to dip buttered toast in tea as a kid. 
This is the way
These are indeed disturbing times
You were supposed to snap them??
I tend to snap in three or four (accidentally). I can snap them as intended. But I always snap them an extra time.
Arnotts wins with the reverse psychology viral marketing.
The choc coated base ones are life changing.
You're missing out. Getting scotch finger biscuited is one of my favourite pastimes. It's such a thrill to dip that biscuit in a warm mug, as deep as you dare, getting it good and soaked, all the while keeping it hard enough to get into your mouth before it comes apart prematurely.
There's definitely less butter in them than there used to be. 
I remember getting to small them as a kid and always failing myself
I found the Arnott’s brand still snaps fairly well. The cheaper ones tend to be a joke though.
Arnotts have changed the recipe for all their biscuits. The don’t admit it, but the current consumer reviews are FIERCE. 
I love annoying the people around me by not snapping my kit kat. I dont even bite at the end. I take a big bite out of the middle of the side, making sure I get two to three pieces as I do it. Really fuck that thing up. 

The satisfaction of how it drives people crazy is much nicer than the chocolate itself.
Jesus, what the fuck man, can you NSFW your comment?
Arrest this man
Wowowow, slow down there mate, Kitkats?!? You monster…
You have a sickness. Please seek help.
I eat my kit Kats like bill shorten eats a snag in a roll
Username checks out...
All Arnotts biccies have significantly dropped in quality over the past few years, especially the cream filled ones. I miss almost breaking my teeth on the ginger nuts.
Haha this is how I just felt
Fuck, they got me..
That chocolate gets any thinner, it'll be transparent soon.
If you line them up on the edge of the kitchen bench, using a small mallet thay do actually break
Clearly a psychopath
I eat all the chocolate off the outside of the KitKat sticks before eating the wafer
>  I take a big bite out of the middle of the side

[Bill Shorten, is that you?](https://au.news.yahoo.com/bill-shorten-[breaks-silence-great-scandal-of-2016-election-024104202.html)
[deleted]
If you like a ginger biscuit, try Anna's Thins. Melt in your mouth. It's possible that you may find them in an IGA if there's one nearby.
That’s what I like the most. The original flavour isn’t drowned out by chocolate.
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-20/arnotts-ginger-nut-biscuits-differ-across-australia/8533136

^ doesn't seem to be an April Fools gag at all, op.
There is conflicting evidence and as such I will remove my comment as it could be seen as extremely offensive.
