Matt Wearn just won the Gold in Men's dinghy sailing! That takes our gold medal tally to 15. Came into the final race well ahead of the Cypriot in second, and barring a disastrous final race was going to win gold fairly comfortably.

That makes it two golds for Matt - he won a gold in laser sailing at the Tokyo games
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
The pool. The rapids. The Ocean. Australia dominating the waters.

Not only have Australia not really dropped off in the 2nd week and clinging on to the top 5, now no.3 comfortably (for now). Which I like to think of as first because China/USA are a given to be 1/2 anyway.
This has got to be one of the worst sports to spectate at the Olympics. Completely killed the hype watching them race the earlier and having race abruptly called off when he was in a secure position. Glad we still won that one.
Well done Matty.🥇🇦🇺
God I am so girt right now
Amazing and congrats to Matt!

I e have a real chance of getting to 18 gold today. Our most ever.
We have already equalled our best ever gold medal tally (17) which was achieved at Athens 2004 and Tokyo last time out. One more and it’s Australia’s most successful Olympics ever 🥇
We are honestly so elite
thanks matt one step closer to beating the british
Proud of queen Kennedy bringing a gold home. What a champion she is!
Girt
Add in the skate park, road cycling and hopefully velodrome.

Aussies kicking arse. And so humble. (Competitors not spectators). 🇦🇺😂
We’re killing it in the waterpolo. Got close in the surfing. Skateboarding is kind of in a pool too, right?
... we currently have equal the best gold tally we ever have. This is going to be our best olympics for gold ever
Move over Great Britain, Australia rules the waves now!
Another few chances today too!
Gold in the drink.
Sailing is always a cluster fuck to watch.

The end can be good when everyone tacks and you get an idea of where everyone is close to the finish line.

To have the skill tested it kind of needs to be this way as the decisions to tack and positioning are extremely important for speed/finding wind etc.

They can't really make it more like a traditional race.

A race like the Sydney to Hobart would be awesome, not as long obviously but a one way point to point race would be better for the audience.
As someone that competes in the sport, it's just how it goes. Not uncommon to sit on the water for 6-8 hours for a couple of races if the breeze is inconsistent.
I found the coverage super annoying because there would be multiple races on at once but Nine would be covering the one that was postponed due to lack of wind while the others (which had Aussies in them) were going ahead.
We did it
Girt-by-sea is a nice name for our hometown
Girt Summer
All our gold medals have been in the water or on wheels except the tennis doubles.
You're right, it's an empty pool... I think our best is 17? We gotta get 18 right?
Hot girt Summer.
And now the pole vault. Nina Kennedy just took the gold!
