Australia's 16th gold of the Paris games! What a performance 
The other competitors celebrating his win and lifting him up was so wholesome. Such a great watch.
Arisa last night, now Keegan !!!

Great to watch. Congratulations 🥇🇦🇺
Don’t forget you guys won woman’s park too! Double win for Australia!
After watching the sailing, boy was this far more enjoyable to watch.

I thought the commentators were a bit novice, but the event itself fantastic. I thought it was far too short (maybe needs 4th or 5th run?), and had nfi what any of the tricks were, but still fun to watch.

I love how friendly and nice all the athletes were too each other. Great to see, especially after watching those sports with people fouling one another non stop.

Now we have a 2nd or 1st in the cycling coming up in like 20 minutes. We could get another gold today!
Fantastic first up run by Keegan. Most of the boys failed to complete their first run, but he nailed his.
Put the pressure on the other lads. Some of the boys came up with some decent runs, but Keegan had Gold in his pocket before his last run. If he completed his last run, he may have even bettered his score..

Back to Back for Keegan. ALL the boys chairing him up after the victory. Wonderful to see this spirit in this exciting event.

Australia... Skateboard champions of the world.
Could we genuinley fight for best of the rest this year?
Skateboarding and BMX have become must see Olympics viewing the last couple of them.  Good looking fella too.
These Olympics have reignited my confidence in Australian sport after London and Rio.
Honestly the skating is one of the funnest sports to watch. Great casual vibes, cool tricks. 
It was a good decision to bring it in to the Olympics 

It also helps that Australia fucking rocks at it too
He fucking killed that prelim run for the 93 score. It was buttery smooth.
aussie board riders rule
Truly a stunning performance by Keegan! Well done! 🥇

I recall when skateboarding was first introduced as an Olympic sport several years ago my brother bitching that it wasn't a legitimate sport because blah blah blah rant rave rant rave. I tried explaining to him that it was as legitimate as any other sport and required incredible dedication and training. Sadly it fell on deaf ears. What a dick.🤔
Simply the best
SK8 or die
Had a monster run on the first round, and in a weird Bradbury way, everyone fell over trying to beat him.
amazing efforts from both arisa and keegan! 

  
just imagine if shane put together some decent runs! yuto pulling out that last trick to go from 7th to 1st would have been pretty hard to beat though...
Skateboarding was so fun to watch! Well done to him and all the contestants. Such a wholesome sport
This was glorious to watch. Skateboarding has been the absolute raddest event at the Olympics. That is, until the Break Dancing starts. All bets are off then.
Australia smashing it at the skateboarding!
Good on him
Lets go!
So far he is the only male on earth to win this event. I really REALLY hope the women's GM and him win at LA because it would mean defending there titles on home turf
Great work Chicken
Just wait until he gets old enough for his voice to finally break!
I'm wrapped that he chose to represent Australia, but gee it's a very tenuous link! Quarter Aussie parentage and only lived here from 1 to 14 years old. But hell yeah I'll take it! On ya Keegan!
He's holding the wrong flag, he was born and lives in the USA, lol.
Definitely the event with the highest level of sportsmanship!
Skateboarding has such a supportive and uplifting culture, so it's great to see it showcased here again. 

Each of these competitors so joyful.
Congrats Keegan on retaining your Gold!
Tate Carew the entire event was congratulating everyone and getting to everyone straight away to gas them up. It was awesome, I've got a lot of time for him.
Read that as he won that too! I need some sleep
GOLD MEDAL IN THE CYCLING, BABY!
We are also a real good chance for gold in the Women's pole vault which is on now.
Nah the skate commentators are great. They are so enthusiastic and both skaters, I love it.
Did you guys have Australian commentators? We watched on BBC and the commentators were also pro skaters so it was very good!
The Aussie skate commentators are great, what do you want from skate commentators? 😝
We're beating France by 5 gold medals - France is probably gonna win a few with handball and shit but there's a chance our leads already too big. I don't think anyone apart from France has a chance of beating us unless GB do really really well at the rest of the cycling events.
Same with sports climbing
Yep, we really need to lean into it and ensure sports for Australian kids is accessible and affordable, I'm not sure if they are still doing it, however, NSW used to give out active kids vouchers, which was like $100 per kids which you could use on registration fees or sports equipment for kids, such a great idea and needs to be continued.

Edit: I actual remember talking to the owner of Commencal bikes in Thredbo earlier this year at a downhill mountain bike event and he was blown away at the amount of kids at the event, he travels all over the world with his team, some of them world champions, and told me that no where in the world has the amount of kids riding and following mountain biking like Australia has, so hopefully we can see some success on the world stage in this soon too!
To be fair he was born in the US, moved to Australia for a while, and now lives in the US.
More like a reverse Bradbury as he led and others fell trying so hard to catch him.
He's 21.
That’s 2/3 of his life lol
His choice entirely.
Honestly growing up as a millennial, I found that a lot of the skater dudes and girls in my high school were the most wholesome and supportive people. I made most of my friends at the skate park and am still friends with them now.
Hopefully skateboarding becomes more popular in Australia. I think it's a healthier and more social pastime for teenagers than soccer.
Same, keen to finish the pole vault but don’t think I can make it
The poms never had a chance, being about two-tenths of a second behind until their most unfortunate saddleslip knackered all hope. 

We didn't do a Steve Bradbury, this was sheer class, not arse.
I've never disliked an Aus competitor more than this one for some reason
I love those two. 

One thing I really appreciate is they convey the emotion not the technicalities. If someone lands a crazy trick they don't say 'now the 1080 buttflip" they go "WHOOOAAA!!!"

The beginner viewer needs that kind of guide.
France is out of the handball. Threw it away in the last seconds to Germany!
Oh man that is freakishly good!  I don't know how they spider-man their way up so fast.
yeah yeah he is aussie as 😆
Explains the accent. I expected ocker, got cali. 

NBD, my son now in SF has picked up a rhotic R.
The sound of people you don't know yelling 'yeah!' and slapping their wheels on the ground in the skater version of clapping, because you landed a sick trick, filled a void in me where a mother's love normally resides. Didn't eventually have to be a hard trick, just had to be hard for you. Never criticism or put downs, unless you were a rollerblader :-p
Definitely, rippin billies and going for a skate is an Aussie pastime, lol.

Have you skated much? Most of skateboarding culture is not just about getting padded up and going to a local skate park with a coach to learn.

It's about cruising around the streets with ya mates, skating public and most likely illegal spots. Not that I have anything against all that, it's just this Olympic version is a very watered down and PC view of the sport.
It used to be very popular. There was even an entire city block in the middle of Melbourne's CBD, that was a skate park. And an underground half pipe nearby. Skateboard culture in general has faded since the 80s and 90s though.
Make sure you support the construction and maintenance of skate parks in your community. A lot of folks don’t understand this and resist them based on outdated or completely misguided perceptions.
Soccer?! NRL and AFL are far more popular…
Soccer's popularity needs to die, as does basketball. They aren't sports conducive to sportsmanship. 

Although the fear is, if skateboarding became popular, would it be subject to the same issues. 

Skateboarding used to be one of the most gate-kept things ever. There was no learning. If you couldn't, Ollie, don't even dare go to a skatepark as you'll get assaulted with a skateboard.
You've got some great news to wake up to if you didn't!
Who? Nina Kennedy?
He’d been in Australia since he was one, definitely still got a bit of that Gold Coast drawl in him!

Best part is he had the choice of who he represented and he picked Australia!
Haha the rollerblader line is so accurate 😂😂
Spending the last 20 years skateboarding in Australia I have watched it go from exactly what you stated, a stoned past time for misfits and ratbags to a more accepting and wholesome way for kids to learn and grow. You don’t see the self destructive behaviours at skateparks these days, and as an adult now I’m not against it one bit.

Watered down version? Mate these skaters are the absolute pinnacle of athleticism. It’s something every kid would benefit from striving for.
That's what makes seeing it in the Olympics so surreal
Skateboarding has always been big and always will be, so many people in this country confuse out of sight out of mind as being "niche" lol
> Skateboard culture in general has faded since the 80s and 90s though

It literally has never been bigger. There are more parks and more skaters than ever.
The local school principal literally met with local skaters because he acknowledged we wanted somewhere to skate, there was no skate park, and the school had some rad stuff to skate. Rather than start calling police etc he was willing to work with us to lay some ground rules and even got the school maintenance crew to weld up some old steel we could use for portable rails.


Things looked great for maybe the first ever Principal-Punk-Partnership but unfortunately the school's legal counsel cod washed it pretty quick, for reasons that are obvious now as an adult. I believe he did also start talking to the council, which led to a meeting between skaters and council development people in the car park of one of the local skater haunts. Not long after we had our cities first skate park. 
Incorrect. Footy and league are actually the 5th and 6th most played junior sports behind soccer, basketball, cricket and netball.
That's a weird take, basically every competitive activity struggles with sportsmanship. 
True. Not as much money in skating I would assume.
The gate keeping had a purpose. In the 90s, kooks definitely could turn up to the skatepark, but they probably couldn’t expect to get as many runs as anyone who could skate. And they’d probably get ragged on a bit, maybe not so much if they knew some crew. It’s probably a carry over from surfing where a heavy lineup will have a pecking order. 

The reason why it was like this was to ensure skateparks could be used to their potential by skaters who actually could. There were no parents, no scooters, no kids playing slippery dip down the bowl when you’re trying to session it. You could just take your turns without having to dodge little Theo and Iris on their balance bikes, with puffer-jacketed dad trailing not far behind. There was etiquette to follow and people who would ensure that it was. Now they’re just playgrounds for little kids and their entitled parents. So anyway we skate at night now.
Definitely didn't expect a 4-gold day (overnight for us)!!
I regret not staying up now, it was only another 20 mins, I was going to be tired either way and the result got spoiled by someone in a meeting. No warning, he just goes “most successful Olympic day ever”, coulda bloody smacked him. 
Still happy but I really would’ve loved to experience the thrill of it as it happened.
yep. brat. dumps pole on track. ungracious compared to pretty much every other medallist from aus and every other country in every other event
Self destructive behaviours?

I'd say that repeatedly smashing bone into concrete is up there, and par for the course for a skateboarder.
I think they mean that this version misses the point of the culture.

The reason why everyone is so supportive is that it's never been a 'sport'. It's almost an artistic pursuit. Everyone has their own style. Everyone wants each other to be able to express themselves. 

Competing against each other is the antithesis of this culture.
These kids are amazing but the culture certainly has changed. 

They don't go and skate on the street, they train train train. 
The demographics are totally different now too. Most skaters are very young and less people 18 and older doing it for sure. Right?
I agree they are great skaters and at the top of the sport, but come on, look at the styles. You've got some old blokes as president of world skateboarding looking stiff as a nail in a suit.

Skateboarding, along with sports like snowboarding, surfing etc goes beyond the technical execution of tricks. It is judged (and should be judged) subjectively on things like style. It has a whole culture attached to it that is not related to competition at all.

How about the guys going out and taking 15 runs at a massive 20 set of stairs to get that one shot. I'd say there are plenty of skaters that could pull of shit just as big as these guys, but do not skate for competition.

I'm not saying having it on the Olympics is bad in anyway, but it's also not a full reflection of skateboarding. As opposed to things like track and field, or gymnastics etc. It is different.

Also, it's great that there is a welcoming culture of kids going out and skating at parks and training etc, I love that. Both can exist.
I think a lot of younger people don't realise just how big it was 25-35 years ago.
I always say, you have to pay to play. That part of my comment was in regard to substance abuse.
Competing is ok, skaters push each other all the time, but competing to be handled a medal by the president of skateboarding who is some stiff old man in a suit, that is definitely a contrast to traditional skateboarding.
Skateboarding has always been about overcoming challenges and celebrating with your mates
The difference is these guys execute under pressure with limited runs. The blokes throwing themselves down 20 sets have endless attempts. Keegan, Yuto, Arisa etc. have no style? Nyjah no style? Please. I’ve been hearing this shit from skateboarding “purists” for years. Load of bull. Skateboarding was always going to evolve from a counter-culture past time into an elite sport, no point trying to denigrate the latter in the process.

I think the skateboarding culture has been represented incredibly at the olympics, it’s shown the world how much comraderie and sportsmanship exist within the culture. 

Embrace it for what it’s becoming. It deserves to be celebrated and showcased on the biggest stages.
Yeah, well I'm 50 and have been skating since 1988 (I still skate too). I'm well aware how big it used to be. There are now waaaaaay more parks than there were in the 90s.
Yeah good point
yep, not vs your mates. it's good they seem to still have the camaraderie, but i wonder how long it will last. snowboarding saw the same thing, much earlier and it's changed it.
