
Crazy, such an intense race from the get go and the Aussies absolutely smashed it in the end! 

Immense hour for the Aussies gold medal count! I think we're now tied at 17 like Tokyo!
That was the most intense track cycling race I've ever watched live. Holy smokes. Until that wobble, I thought GB would pip us in the end.
Unfortunate ending for GB on the last lap there. Would have been satisfying to see us win by 0.1-0.2s but we were on pace to win anyway so it doesn't feel undeserved.
Imagine if we could stay in the Top 3 by the end of the games
Seems like we're going to break our record of gold medals
that sport is crazy wtf. I dont know how they manage not to hit the guy in front.
So proud! 🇦🇺
Bad luck Poms!
Just watched the replay. Our coach was so nervous.
For some reason I was so surprised at how young all the aussie winners were... amazing champions!
that's mad. Are we a good chance to get gold in anything else but the women's pole vault?
I agree, definitely thought we were goners there. I don't even know what happened to team GB.
I watched all the of the team pursuit. I am no expert but Australia kept formation and swapped riders more often than every other team. Other teams would start faster but would always slow down in the final lap while Australia accelerated it was brilliant tactical viewing.
Yeah I think we win that still without the wobble by GB but I was probably just as stressed as that aussie cycling coach on the track haha
I keep waiting for us to drop down, but every morning a few more gold appear.
We have! 18 is our new record
Poms have to be looking good for the moral victory in the medal tally by now.
Yeah we have some definite medal chances and potential golds. 

There are still a heap of track cycling races to go, we are doing well in the Water Polo for both men (quarters) and women (semis), the Opals (ranked 3) have a chance but it will be tough to beat the USA, Del Solar and Clancy got silver in the Tokyo for the beach volleyball and are in the semis, Matthew Denny just missed Bronze last time in the discuss throw so has a chance to medal, Mackenzie Little is in form for the Javelin throw and Kesley-Lee Brown won Bronze in Tokyo, Jess Hull is doing some great things in the 1500m races recently, we have two boxers into the semis of the weight class, Madison Keeny and Cassiel Rousseau in 3m and 10m diving respectively and Mens Kayaking races still to go. 

I think (hopefully not jinxing it) that we will surpass Tokyo.
Matthew Denny in discus
Looked like that rider was just too far on his seat and fell off. No chance after that
Streaks ahead on the moral tally
I'm pretty sure we have a mens pair that are defending their Tokyo gold in the kayaking too.
Bronze ...
Ooooofff.....I mean, yay us. But god that has to be heartbreaking for that guy.
