
First ever Gold in a female field event for Australia!
Medal chances for Australia still to come: 

- Several Track cycling races
- Women's Water Polo (upcoming semi final)
- Basketball: Super tough to beat the USA but Opals are ranked third (Semis) 
- Beach Volleyball: Del Solar and Clancy got silver in the Tokyo (semis)
- Javelin: Mackenzie Little (in form and good chance) and Kesley-Lee Brown (won Bronze in Tokyo)
- Jess Hull is in a good form and had a great London diamond series for the 1500m 
- Boxers: Both Charlie Senior and Caitlin Parker are in the semis for their weight class
- Diving: Madison Keeny (3m) and Cassiel Rousseau (10m)
- Mens Kayaking races to go
God what a brilliant final. Kennedy was amazing. 

Been an amazing day. 4 gold medals. Looking like 3rd is pretty much sewn up. 

Could we hit 20 Golds?
That's an incredible achievement with history being made.  

NIna's the first Aussie woman to win an olympic gold medat at a Field event - WOW
Nothing more to come after the swimming events right guys. 

We gonna go crazy in Brisbane come 2032
EQUAL BEST DAY EVER IN OLYMPIC HISTORY FOR AUSTRALIA GET IN!!!!!!!!!!!!
What have they put in the vegemite this year??
For us to be coming third in the tally behind the US and China is phenomenal considering the amount of people and money they both throw at sports. Such an amazing achievement from our athletes and such an inspiration, especially for my two girls who only want to watch the Olympics instead of cartoons!
Fucking hell! What a night!! Bring on Brisbane! Nobody else is going to win anything in 2032
We are INSANE
Four more days to go and this is already our best Olympics campaign ~~over.~~ ever

And to think, they're adding cricket for LA 2028...
We’re not done yet! What an incredible games. I’m absolutely beaming with pride.
Four gold medals in a day?! Post swimming too? What an achievement by all these athletes.

Didn't expect 18 so early...
yay! bring it on! let’s hope we hit 20 golds!
It we invest in all events properly from now, 2032 has a real chance of a top 2 finish.
The women have carried us.
I think a public holiday in appreciation of Australian female Olympians is in order
For the population we have vs the rest well done!! We are killing it
Sport can save us
Did you just say "more to come"?

Let's not jinx it.
This puts Australia on track to make the top five for per-capita summer Olympics gold medals for the first time since 2004 and the top ten for the first time since 2008.
I don't care what anyone says, I've been immensely enjoying these Olympics. Even more so because it's been upsetting a lot of snowflakes
Go Aussie
I saw this live at Stade de France yesterday and it was clear to me from the beginning that she was going to take home the gold!!! She had an UNFORGETTABLE game face on—don’t think I’ve ever seen someone look so focused, powerful, and hungry in my life. What an event, what an athlete!!
Nina Kennedy is a legend. Best gold of the games.
Shit yeh. Proud of the whole team. We would get more medals I think but sadly on the day with some  events we didn’t get there aka Matilda’s.
Yesssss , go you good thing! 🇦🇺🇦🇺 🥇
Ohhh shit yeah
So proud of us hell yea!
Made of Steele.
it's easier for her without the massive schlong holding her back
Jesus that’s an insane acheivment! Had no idea we’d never done it before.
Incredibly hard to win a field goal due to popularity of athletics.  Australia now has just 4 - Nick Winter  1924 triple jump, John Winter 1948 high jump, Steve Hooker 2008 pole vault.
I had to look that up because it sounded so unlikely but you're right! One gold in heptathlon but no pure field events before now, incredible
Except for last olympics?

Nah I was wrong it was the commonwealth I heard em talking about
field event is an athletics contest such as the high jump or throwing the discus or javelin, rather than a race.


Wonder how came up with that word.
Kelsey Lee is out of the javelin. She missed distance on all three throws due to injury recovery in the lead up.
Min Jee Lee in the Golf is a chance too
Oceania Mackenzie in women's boulder & lead has an outside chance of a medal if she can put up a decent score in the lead semis tonight
Funny enough I saw someone comment when we were at 13 golds that they couldn't see where we'd get a 14th to get to Beijing's total, let alone approaching Sydney/Athens/Tokyo!
Both the boxers are guaranteed at least bronze as the two semi finalists losers get a bronze by default. No 3rd v 4th fight.
Min Jee Lee not too far out in the golf either
The kayak men's pair for the 500m look unstoppable.
Kelsey Lee-barber didn’t progress through the qualifying round of the javelin last night
Thank you
I rate Eileen Cikamatana in the women’s 81kg weightlifting as well
There’s a good chance with the cycling!
Yeah we are killing expectations there is a far chance we will come third over all
Keep in mind that on top of new Olympic events..   Russia is pretty much out of the picture as well.  In Rio 2016 we got 8 golds and Russia 19.    Changes things quite a bit
The people making those comments were forgetting quite a lot of events, particularly cycling.
That was my mates, sent a message this morning saying they need to apologise to the team for not backing them in
Ah that makes sense. I wondered why we went all out these games and makes sense we’re trying to scale up for brissy
Exactly.
What an Olympics so far, let's crack the 20 golds
Cheeky bit of Milo
Something good for a change
Australia throws lots of resources into sports as well.  Plus we're fielding a higher percentage of athletes vs the overall population compared to a lot of other countries.

China: 405 athletes from 1.4 billion

Australia: 460 athletes from 27 million
T20 though, so who knows
>adding cricket for LA 2028

How long until BCCI tries to hold the IOC hostage....?
i Think this is our 8th time getting 4 golds. Happened twice in Tokyo, but both times included swimming medals
we already invest a ton of money (400+ million to Australia Institute of Sports). but you know what, we've spent money on worse things so I'm ok with spending a bit more for 2032
What about the male olympians? Why only female Olympian’s?
Well everyone seems to be loving these games. All my friends coming back this week are raving about Paris. May be the best Games ever.
What’s upset the snowflakes?
She's outstanding in her field.
That's insane.
Yeah I felt sure someone like Tatiana Grigorieva or Jhye Taurima had won one, but nope.
Glynis Nunn!
What stood out as wrong in my mind is that I remember Australia dominating women's pole vault when it was first introduced. But looked it up, and nope, best was silver in 2000 (the first women's pole vault event).
Field events are played on the (in)field of the athletics tracks. That's where they got the name.
That's a shame, but a great effort nonetheless.
She’s through to finals now!
Nah, Russia basically not being there is absolutely the reason we've taken 3rd, but the areas they usually medal in don't overlap with where we've won. These achievements are all on the Aussies and would've happened anyway!
Doesn’t only help Australia though
Ohhhh I hadn’t thought of that.
And what a lot of people don’t realise is that the rowing underperformed signifcantly. We usually win 1/2 golds there. 

Even swimming there were 4 events we were favourites in we didn’t win.
With the success we've had in events like skateboarding, cycling (road, track, and BMX), and the canoe, it feels like we could be entering a new era for Australian Olympic sports, especially outside the pool. 

Our swimmers are all incredible athletes who deserve all the recognition they get but there is so much amazing action outside of swimming for Australia at the Olympics this year, and it makes me even more excited for future Olympics.
Tbf our cycling performance in Tokyo was woeful
Fuckin we’re doin alright ey
With a sprinkle of weetbix
You’d think that selecting 405 out of 1.4 billion would have more competition and more natural talent though.
This is flawed I assume. I don't know where that data comes from, but I'll assume it's true and just move on to the flaw.


Australia have a LOT of Olympians on large teams who are all collectively competing for one medal together. Examples men and women's 7s, men and women's basketball, men and women's hockey, men and women's water polo.


I suspect China only would have representation in a couple of those.


The real metric would be how many potential medal events they're competing in
Our athlete level is somewhat misleading. Some countries won't send athletes if they "only" meet the Olympic qualifying level and instead they set a higher standard. The Netherlands for example refused to send 3 golfers who had qualfied because they didn't think they'd rank highly. While Great Britain refused to send a handful of athletes who had met the qualifying standard including a steeplechase athlete who was 0.15 of a second outside the GB standard. His qualifying time would have likely put him in the final as well. 

While generally for us if you qualify you go.
I want to see the number of entrants into events we have vs China

Feels like we have a lot more teams and they have a lot more individual athletes
I don't really get this argument. The fact that we manage to be competitive against other countries that have many magnitudes larger populations and throw at least comparable (and likely significantly more) money at the Olympics isn't diminished by how many athletes we field. 

Olympic golds aren't uniformly distributed over how many people participate. You have to get into finals and then actually win them.  If your PB is 10.23 going into the men's 100m heats, simply being fielded does not increase your country's likelihood of a medal, you're not going to be competitive. The fact is, Australia is overrepresented in *winning*.
I'm just looking forward to laughing at the English team being forced to compete under the name "Great Britain".

Also the fact that there wont be a unified West Indies team will make it interesting. The separate countries like Jamaica and Barbados have the same status as our Sheffield Shield teams.
Yeah we’re not the best at T20, should snag a silver though.
probably next month
Yeah, although I did say, invest properly. I don't think that 400 is being split evenly.

Tax mining companies properly and we can invest properly in track and field. Peter Bol for example received $5000 in funding over 6 years in the lead up to the Tokyo Olympics.
The boys did have a good night to be fair
Apparently some guy flashed their penis ( didn't look like a penis to me) in the opening ceremony. Also a few other so called woke things
She’s not just out there standing! 

She’s using a big pole to get over really high obstacles!
Daaaaaaaad
Is she a scarecrow?
Jhye competed as a male, and won silver in the long jump in Sydney.
I thought that too, and had memories of Emma George setting lots of world records - but they were all in the 90s, she would've been odds on to win if they held it in Atlanta '96 but couldn't get it in Sydney
What events did we miss in swimming? I thought we pretty got everything that we expected. Perhaps the only thing we missed was the 100m women freestyle.  Not sure if we were favourites for that, but regardless the Swedish swimmer was on absolute fire.
Our rowing has been pretty poor this year.
I mean we’re doing stuff all, but a handful of people are doing ok
And a Tim Tam for good measure
They are still above us. Keep in mind that China still has a fair bit of poverty as well.
Takes a lot of program training etc to convert natural talent though.
Ratios would still be skewed towards over representation by Aus.

China has 51 times the population of Australia.
We set higher standards in the swimming
Australia also qualified a lot of teams into the Olympics this time around so they blow out the numbers - 2 x Rugby, 2 x basketball, 2 x Hockey, 2 x Water Polo and 1 x Football.  Plus things such as rowing eights.
Our top sporting programs make for more athletes entering professional competitions like the olympics.  A lot of these people don't have "natural gifts" and it requires years of the right training to get them to qualifying (and winning) levels.  It's this investment which is disproportionate to some other countries that have much larger populations.
if the recent t20 world cup had medals we wouldn't have medalled btw. some food for thought
Just put a team of BBL All stars
No I am.
Yep was looking at it general, wasn't just looking at the women's obviously. Only having 4 in field in total before Paris was a surprise to me.
Yeah we were as Mollie had the fastest qualifying time but 100m freestyle is such a tough event that even the smallest difference in your prep can fuck you over

But yeah the Swede had an amazing race
Sam Short at his best was the favourite in the 400 and 800 freestyle, but has had a shit lead in so came away with nothing. Kaylee also had the fastest time this year heading into the 200 IM but her schedule was so packed at the end there she wasn't close to that time.
We’re all coaching from the couch.
Don't underestimate the power of the all the athletes families, friends, coaches etc. supporting them from home. 

All that energy from the crowds, the stories of people getting up through the night to watch them compete, the messages of inspiration from home, and knowing the country is cheering them on... it all plays into the mindset of the athletes and has an impact on how they perform on the night.
the standards set in the swimming aren't artificial though, they are set by natural competition. We can only send 2 competitors in each event and there is a fight for those spots.
With the exception of the Mens 1500 free and 200 Butterfly, we had at least two athletes meet the qualification and Australian standards and were sent to the Olympics. Only Matthew Galea in the 1500m missed out despite meeting the Olympic time by two seconds and would have missed the final by 13.

Generally though if you meet the standards you go, swimming is an edge case because generally we have at least two swimmers who meet both.
We dropped a game we normally never should have, if we won that game we then go on to vs South Africa in the Semis and likely win to make the final vs India who choked the ODI against us so who knows.

Big what ifs but one disappointing tournament doesn’t make us terrible. We are still ODI andTest Champions and won T20 in 2021
So you are
r/happyupvote
Yeah I agree with that. But tough to say those were chances that were missed. As you say, it wasn’t expected for them to win those events in the Olympics.
Exactly this, I personally am responsible for cheering all 18 of these gold medals on while I sat on my couch drinking beers and for that, I personally deserve all the credit.
They are artificial, we set a qualifying time at the time that would have made the final of the event in the previous world championship. As such we only send 1 and sometimes 0 in some events
No it wasn't expected but they were definitely a chance if things had gone differently
I think Sam Short was favourite to win either the 800 or 1500 (cant remember which off the top of my head)just prior to the start of olympics. Seems the illness he had around the time of the trials heavily affected his prep.
He was favourite for both. Not sure what happened. Didn’t even make the final for the 800m.
At the start of the olympics he wasn’t the favourite. I think he had a bad case of Covid and was still getting back into form. Even the Aus commentators were saying he wasn’t the favourite to win.
