Thoughts on this new design?

Personally I love the font. Feels more like the news, maybe like a physical paper. 

The round edge are great too. 
Absolutely horrid. So much more cluttered
It's shithouse.
It is crap. Everything is so big that I can see about 4 stories on my page. Looks more like a tabloid page now
It's fucking atrocious. This is what I see:

2/3 of a page useless chrome

1 full page headline story

4 stories

1 full page story

2 stories

Just In section

more chrome

full page of "Everyone's Talking About"

3 local news stories

videos

finally some more news stories

AFAICT they've recently changed from here on, as for weeks I've struggled to find more than 6 news stories anywhere.

There's just way too much bullshit that's not news, and that's ignoring the fact that the ABC doesn't know the difference between human interest stories and news in the first place.

I've started going to the SMH for my news first, and I hate those pricks.

Edit: fixed formatting
I must just be lucky. I see no changes to my view on https://www.abc.net.au/news
FUCKING TERRIBLE. It used to be okay
There have been times I've closed an article assuming I'm reading 9now or something to look for the ABC article only to discover that's what I was already reading
I'd need to know what they were trying to achieve before commenting on it. 
The new format sux, its just too cluttered. But I have discovered that if I open abc news in an incognito window it reverts to the old format.
May look more modern but my first impression a week ago when they started offering it was that it was really messy. Breaks in the vertical structure being prioritised by the editor doesn’t make me feel like it’s rolling coverage, instead looks like the editor is simply prioritising key stories that simply didn’t need the emphasis. Room for refinement, probably ties in better with their app or something?
So they've mimicked Bumble?
Flashbanged every time I open the app
Wait until you see the bom's new beta site.
At the very least, where’s dark mode?
Never go full news dot com dot au
Yeah first day I was like, Ok, this looks nice. It got annoying and cluttered real quick. Is it possible to revert back, or are we stuck?
I haven't got the changes yet, but i opened a news story in incognito the other day and it had the new design so I could see a side by side. The new design is atrociously inefficient and ugly.
I don't even see it in incognito mode. I wonder if it's the mobile site only? I'm browsing on desktop at the moment
Yes, it's the mobile site.
Ahhh. That explains it. I don't use the mobile site at all. Thanks for clearing that up!
