
If private operators need taxpayer funds to retain staff, then it's time for state-owned childcare. I don't want my taxes shielding them from competition just so their CEOs can buy another Porsche.
It seems that the centres can't raise fees by more than 4% in the first year after the wage increase. What's the betting that there's a convenient need for a large increase the year after?

I'm all for a fair wage for the educators, but the fees charged never seem to trickle down to the workers at the largest centres. It's a very big business for some
I want more pay for childcare workers, but I really doubt any of the owner/operators will stop jacking up their fees, and I'm pretty sure the government thinks exactly the same thing. Can you see Peter Dutton limiting increasing the size of his wallet to benefit the staff at his child care centers?
They should push for a better deal, the sector is very understaffed. If they take the first offer they'll forever be on the back foot.
How about fixing the underlying economic realities that make it so difficult for parents to raise their own children.
So there isn't anything in it for the business. Well this is going to go down well isn't it? /S
Why not pay the parents to become full-time house parents instead? The government spent so much money on childcare.
Another rort to the system. Geez.
We should have publicly-funded early childhood education. It should be no different to public schools

Why are parents expected to spend so damned much on this? 

And early childhood educators certainly deserve a pay rise
An entire industry where the people who own it get to walk away with millions all while getting taxpayers to fund their business and pay their staff. Despicable thieves.
Soooo overdue! Can't believe the difference between pay for childcare workers and kindie teachers. Childcare workers deal with more complex needs and kids struggling through much longer days.
Government pumping more money into the economy
Should give more money to Holden and Ford to not leave Australian manufacturing and that'll solve the childcare crisis caused by greedy vested interests making billions in profits off taxpayers who don't even have children during a decline in birthrates. More of everyone elses money solves all the problems.
As an Early Childhood Educator, it is very frustrating to have people tell me this news and expect me to be over the moon. Why is public money propping up private enterprise? My boss, who is otherwise lovely, had the temerity to complain last year that the government wasn't doing enough to pay workers. It's literally her job to pay workers!

15% sounds great, except it will bump a year's wages up to $60,000, which is still not enough to buy a home or raise kids or anything. And it does not match the skills and workload expected.

Last year, I realised that the push for a "terminology" shift in childcare was a backwards way of achieving meaningful change in the sector. By talking about how important early childhood education is and how much we should respect the power of educators and teachers, we've essentially conned ourselves into doing more work for less play.

We are a necessary workforce. We should be saying "You want us to do more? Pay us more.". Instead, we're pleading and preening to be noticed. The sector is worse than ever, has shoddy and mixed up union representation, and is run by people whose primary concern is to make more money from your children.
Agree with this 100%, government runs schools. There is so much evidence about the need for early childhood education, as well as it being needed to make our modern society work (2 working parents etc). Government should just start up a large amount of centres, pay workers a decent wage and if it runs the private sector out of business good, otherwise they can compete properly.
Totally agree. Any tax payer money going into early childcare is going to pay for itself by having better educated kids and parents who can work without losing an entire salary to childcare.
Exactly. Government is paying the workers, government is paying the childcare fees... like what else is left?
Nationalise childcare.

And healthcare.

And higher education.

And utilities.

Privatisation has failed everywhere it's been implemented. We should not be funneling money into CEOs' pockets to provide a subpar service, especially for things that are so essential to the health of society.
Double dipping , no doubt!
they can hike 4.4pct and still get the grant. rba inflation guide is 2-3pct.
will not be cos few will have to means to start family.
This has been negotiated by unions
like defund fiat gov n fund ubi.
Agreed - its far better for a parent to be at home with their own kids.
Aside from the obvious (limiting the career progression of the parent who is now staying at home, which then limits their future earning potential), the reason early childhood education and care services are important is because they lead to higher literacy and numeracy, higher future education achievement (which in turn impacts other things like crime rates and public health), higher future earnings, and all of \*that\* is stuff that directly benefits the future economy of our nation.

The vast majority of parents are not trained in developmental psychology and pedagogical practices, and would be absolutely garbage at developing and implementing an appropriate ECE program. Having children in ECEC services benefits the nation - paying someone to hang out at home does not.
Then you'd have a bunch of women whining about a pay gap that only exists by virtue of theirs and their baby daddies own choices, or indeed doesn't exist at all.
Its to also keep the opposition party leader Dutton happy.
more inflation.
>As an Early Childhood Educator, it is very frustrating to have people tell me this news and expect me to be over the moon. Why is public money propping up private enterprise? My boss, who is otherwise lovely, had the temerity to complain last year that the government wasn't doing enough to pay workers. It's literally her job to pay workers!

You do realise this isn't how things work right? Please God tell me you realise that?

Your boss doesn't magically pull money out of her nethers and give it to you. Money comes from either the government or parents. That's it. So either the government pays more or parents do and parents don't have any more money to spend. It's already at the point where parents with more than a couple kids in care are better off staying home most of the time.

>15% sounds great, except it will bump a year's wages up to $60,000, which is still not enough to buy a home or raise kids or anything. And it does not match the skills and workload expected.

Childcare fees are about $140 a day on average. Kids can be there for about 12 hours giving $12/hr for all costs including food. I'm assuming that at 60k a year your hourly rate is about $30 per hour. So it takes 2.5 kids just to pay your salary.

Assuming absolute minimum ratios, the infant room is producing $18/hr per staff member and the older kids around $90/hr. Definitely more profitable to have the older kids, but those kids need to get fed, admin staff need to be paid, rent needs to be paid, toys and equipment bought and maintained.

If your salary increased to $40 an hour the infant room now makes $8 per staff member, $50 an hour (ballpark what a somewhat experienced teacher would make) it's running at a loss.

The service you provide is valuable, but individually centres aren't massively profitable, which is why big chains exist because extra costs go down and the small profits add up.
Remove private business from the equation. It doesn’t seem like for profit childcare is even close to working.
taxpayers not gov paying.
and limit gov pay to 3x minimum wages.
That's why I said limiting increases. Very few owners will hold back.
they can even wfh part time.
most childcare workers are not that well trained.
Children need to develop secure attachments in their early years before any development or learning can take place. This does not happen where child care staff are burnt out, staff turnover is high and centres are filled with relief staff because of the high sickness rate. This in turn certainly does impact the health needs, crime rates etc later on but not in a positive way…..
Yeah , reversing everything RBA did . Why is anyone bothered about recession, we have been in per capita recession for long time
Thanks for succinctly making the argument that childcare shouldn't be a private industry.


Between subsidies and fees, the public and families are already copping the cost. So why is any single cent of that going towards profit? 
....yes, they are. Everyone working in ECEC at the moment either has or is working towards a minimum cert III in ECEC (and 50% of people working in a service have to have or be working towards a Diploma), which very much covers developmental psychology and pedagogical practices, as does the EYLF which is the entire framework within which they work.

Maybe *read* the EYLF and you'll have a better understanding of what it is that educators are doing every day lol. 
Developing secure attachments *is* development and learning. That's why it's literally the very first outcome (EYLF 1.1) in the Australian ECEC framework. 

And that's why the money is better spent on actually paying educators a liveable wage - so that a high standard of care is maintained - rather than just paying some dunce to sit around at home with their kid in front of the TV or an iPad all day. You were like, so dang close to the point, and yet somehow still missed it.
> Between subsidies and fees, the public and families are already copping the cost. So why is any single cent of that going towards profit?

Because it might be cheaper to fund it this way than to run it?

Government isn't any less efficient than private entities, but huge entities are much more bureaucratic than big ones.

I'm not opposed to government running it, but don't imagine that it's guaranteed to be better or that you'd get paid more.
being trained and well trained is 2 different things
Cheaper for who? Like you said, money doesn't come from nowhere. So either the money is coming from the government or it is coming from families. As it stands, large chunks of that cash are lining the pockets of the people who run childcare services.

Money spent on children is money invested into the economy. Money spent on CEOs is money pissed up against a wall.
And how many parents are trained at all in how to deliver ECEC? Literally only the ones who have worked or do work in ECEC 😂 You're literally only proving my point dude. 
> Cheaper for who? Like you said, money doesn't come from nowhere. So either the money is coming from the government or it is coming from families. As it stands, large chunks of that cash are lining the pockets of the people who run childcare services.

For the taxpayers.

Large organisations, public or private, have a lot of overhead, the government is an absolutely huge organisation.

It's possible that it's cheaper to pay a small organisation to do the job than to do it themselves. Maybe, maybe not. 

> Money spent on children is money invested into the economy. Money spent on CEOs is money pissed up against a wall.

We're in a lot of trouble if you're teaching our next generation.

Being government owned doesn't mean you don't have a CEO or a board or central management, or any of those people, it just means that those people are public servants and despite the fact that a lot of public servants are poorly paid, that doesn't apply to the kinds of people we're talking about.

Again, government isn't inefficient because it's government, it's inefficient because it's huge.
