
You know if you're awkward or ugly enough girls will do this for free! Follow me for more life hacks!
Not true. I only borrowed 24k, the other 1k was a gift from mum
>woman's name is Minki  
  
in certain circles (one being sw/findom) big spenders are commonly referred to as 'whales'

There's a joke in here somewhere...
Findom is a kink where the line between kink and Abuse is extremely narrow. She has a serious responsibility to monitor her clients actual needs and it sounds like she's on the wrong side a bit.

And yes, I've done plenty of domming myself. I've crossed a little into this zone when I've been a bull for couples, by demanding the husband pay for rooms and drinks etc when I'm with their wife. However, there is a need to keep it controlled and limited so it doesn't impact their real lives.
this is worse than people buying bath water, ffs
I have an issue with people who argue that as long as something is consensual it's fine. I think this is an example of how something seemingly consensual can still be unethical and exploitative.
Christ these guys are as pathetic as it gets. Clearly less of a kink and some kind of mental health or addiction issue. I wonder what her plans are with her psych degree.
I hope she's reporting all that money to the ATO as income 🤭
 So suckers for punishment must exist.
“Psychology student” Jesus Christ 🤦‍♂️ 
What? I came in here for an argument!
I’m not familiar with the type of thing I’m seeing
[deleted]
Bring back kink shaming.
Is Findom national news now?
A good wife will do that free of charge. Mine is an example. Complains something needs fixing and even though she knows I'm still thinking deeply about that DIY tap washer project, she starts nagging, as if 6 months is a long time!
This is financial abuse by any other name, but nobody wants to talk about it
This is beyond ridiculous. Why don't these sickos just role play with monopoly money instead of ruining their lives? 
[deleted]
It works the other way as well.  If you're familiar with the travesty that is Fresh n Fit and wonder why the girls keep going on there to get basically insulted a great deal of the time,  many of them report large boosts in their onlyfans subscriptions.  Not just because they are being seen though.  They accumulate new subscribers who specifically want to pay to dish out verbal abuse after enjoying the fact that they got some on the show.  

I don't know what sub-sub-sub genre that goes in.  They beat someone else verbally while beating themselves financially. I'm sure someone's raced to categorise it already.

Idle thought:  Where do people get so much money to do this stuff?  I guess there's a bit of a survivorship bias.  The payed kink career of a brokie is going to be short.
Now where do I find a man like this
Both of them are mentally ill
Why is it when I do it im a " troll" and it's called " deformation" /s
Why the X4!? I typically see women like this dropping the kids at school in either an X7, GLS or Ranger Raptor
Good for her 🖤
So it’s just like having a wife, but you never actually have to be around her in person?

I can see the appeal of paying for that.
Slay queen
What is this? 

This whole thing is hilarious. Gotta be fake; no one could be that ... whatever....😂
Males are so fucking stupid.
Damn I misread this as "if you're an awkward or ugly girl you can do this for free" and got kind of excited for my financial prospects for a sec there.
Haha
lol
A whale of a joke.
At first I thought sw/findom meant Swin-dom 

Like a swindler

not sex worker lol
100%. If there's one thing kinksters can rely on, it's journos finding the absolute worst people to represent us.
Yep, keywords in kink are Safe, Sane and Consensual.
Thanks for the insight.
Yeah, I'm a sub (nothing to do with findom, just my partner is a Dom in the bedroom). The Dom is supposed to care for, protect and ensure mental well-being of their sub/s. 

Most of these girls aren't Doms - they're just taking sub dudes for a ride and letting them destroy themselves financially. It's fucking sad.
How about them drinking the bath water?
Well plenty of people with access to good tap water buy it in plastic bottles, so that’s a good point 👏
It is exploiting people bad habits. I never fall for the rationalisation 
That is a reasonable and rational thought.


There's a spectrum of thought on this, from RACK 
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk-aware_consensual_kink
To FRIES
https://www.idcprofessionals.com/blog/defining-consent-from-fries-to-crisp


I personally can't see how I could ever operate like this ethically without some kind of "and all your money is actually put in a term deposit and returned to you at a later point" carve out.


But by the same token, how many businesses will give out predatory loans or similar?
Be careful you might be giving the people that enjoy this kinda stuff exactly what they’re after with that sort of language 
> I wonder what her plans are with her psych degree.

Well that’s a worry, this bloke was a psychiatrist

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radovan_Karad%C5%BEi%C4%87
Terrifying
They’re vulnerable people being exploited. Don’t be a cunt.
Ah, commenting on the behaviour of others. Clearly you are exhibiting a Truly Freudian compulsion yourself! Why the word other is so close to Mother!
Tell me of your dangerous dabbles with what any reasonable person can only assume is your Bolivian Marching Powder!


Or... Perhaps I'm wrong to play armchair psychiatrist.
Hmmm.
maybe she has a different kink ; a kink for ato garnishing your wages lol
gifts are tax free, right?
If we report it do we get 35% of it like in the US? 

I'm asking as papa needs a new.pair of everything.
It's technically a gift isn't it?
I agree you did!
Keep going, nearly there
How does your brain get so warped that financially ruining your life turns you on? What's even the pathway to this? How is it even sustainable?
>They made their decision, they weren't forced.

I mean you could say the same thing about gamblers that lose heaps of cash but for gambling everyone on here lumps most of the blame towards gambling companies predatory practices (which isn't incorrect).
Well I don’t think name calling them helps (be funny if they read it because they’d get off on that, apparently, so you’re effectively joining in cost free!)
What's the difference between this and tipping a cam girl / subbing to an onlyfans girl?
;)
I'm divorcing you soon.
I mean like, if you HAD conservative, stupid as fuck opinions you'd be some kind of sicko to voice them on a place like reddit, yeah?


Or maybe if I'm judging you and you don't like it, you should not be shamed, publicly by someone of a different opinion?
Well near half of us have mental health issues at some time in life

https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/health/mental-health/national-study-mental-health-and-wellbeing/latest-release
Maybe a psych could explain it. I wondered if being generous is on a continuum, because

> According to The Atlantic, Gafman's team found the brain's mesolimbic system — it's pleasure and reward pathway — lit up. "Some people are really highly motivated to keep giving, " says McQuiston. "They get a high from it, just like things like running, love, money and sex can do. But for most people, giving just makes you feel good."

https://www.abbott.com/corpnewsroom/nutrition-health-and-wellness/giving-better-than-receiving.html#

But, in the article there’s instances where the ‘giving’ is conditional, the donor specifies what it’s to be spent on, so control comes into it as well.
> Now where do I find a man like this

The bankruptcy courts.
Check your local Cash Converters, TAB or pub pokie room at 10 o'clock in the morning
Like those damned homosexuals in the 70s! Beasts! Mentally ill! OTHERSSSS!!!


All because of what pushes their buttons!


Imagine if they had just integrated into society! Cats, marrying dogs! Up is down! It'd be an unnatural hell scape made by these heathenssssss!!
> Why the X4!? I typically see women like this dropping the kids at school in either an X7, GLS or Ranger Raptor

You know the source of these women’s incomes?
Haha wife bad amirite! *wheeze slaps knee*
DAMN! you got hammered for this one!
Well it looks like they spend some time chatting.
I tip my fedora to you, good sir.
Its very real I promise
I've never seen someone refer to men as males before lol. It has the same creepy neckbeardy vibe as referring to women as females
Dumb name, dumber comment.
It's because 95% of people doing this stuff are private about it. We don't want to have this get out. When me and my partners post things online, every face and tattoo is blurred. We have families and real jobs.

This is an Only fans ad of a person who is in an extremely ethically questionable corner of kink.
Man I'd love too. I miss being a dom.
Not to take anything away from the spirit of your joke, but psychology and psychiatry are two different fields with very different paths to training and qualification.
fuck, made me laugh too loud at work xD
Bullying for free in this economy smh
Oh the irony 🤣🤣🤣
And leave your children howling to the sound of that dripping tap? my names not soon btw
Considering the article talks about a well-attended therapy process to overcome this kink, I'd say it's not super conservative to view most of these people as unwell. 
Yeah it's interesting, especially the part where submission seems to train that pathway as well. Or maybe that's too simple.

Either way, to my untrained eye it seems like you can effectively "work" your way into a kink.  Which is an idea I think a lot of the kink community would angrilly reject. It's a true and free expression of their sexual identity that should be respected,  from foot to findom, not something they "taught" their brains to like.
I always refer to women and males. And the males referenced in the article could never be referred to as men.

If it helps I am a male but I will never be a man.
Honestly, it's an ad and we also don't know if any of it is actually the full truth. 

It's entirely possible that nobody actually went into debt.

If it is true, it's extremely shortsighted of her. 

Personally, I rather enjoy telling men that they "have to" invest their money (and extra as punishment, eg. No afterwork drinks this week...you're buying shares), if they're going to have an expensive fetish they need to make sure they can afford it long term.
As someone who has been in and out of the scene. This is 100% correct.  People just want to be privet and play. They don't want this shit known to the world or on social. 

This bitch just looking for more onlyfans customers pretty much.
You interpret this as a *joke*?
Life can be hard without going through that. I wondered if it’s an addiction, and this came up,

https://www.justanswer.com/mental-health/inu26-what-s-best-financial-domination.html
What is the difference between males and men?
What's funny is that I do know of one woman who has done some flavour of findom and I became aware of because she was quite involved in the Share market in a community I was involved with, so I can imagine that exact story.

I feel like Findom is the female equivalent of asshole men who hear about kink and decide it's a way to be selfish sexually. It can be done in a reasonable way, but it looks to idiots like it's easy street by engaging in abuse.
I'd like to, if that's alright with you, because the alternative would seem to be to unironically imply that having a psych background and being a convicted war criminal are somehow related.
A male has a dick and balls. A man is a male that is strong enough to protect his family yet calm enough to never be angry. A man is a male that puts women first. A man is a male that has great strength and courage. A man is a male who does not abandon his wife because she is violent. Basically a male can be a man but I will never be enough to be a man.
Identifying two individuals with a power fetish and “a psych background” hardly slanders that entire scientific field - maybe to the paranoiacally inclined, but I don’t share that view myself.  i
Holy fuck you're insecure.
Weirdo.
It's okay to admit that you pee sitting down and that your Mrs. bashes you, I mean you'd have to inflate her first. but afterwards you're in trouble
So you agree I will never be a man
That is possibly the nicest thing anyone has ever called me. Thank you.
I do sit to pee. I have a dick that looks like a tic tac only smaller so it is easier to sit. And I don't have a Mrs because I abandoned her when she was getting violently abusive. Not a manly thing to do I know
I don't care what you are dude. The pity party thing is pathetic. Help yourself and others will be more inclined to help you. Be better than this.
never be a real human, maybe
Oh sorry, you've misunderstood me then.
Have you tried Fin Dom, you'd love it
I have no pity for me. Don't worry. All the things I say about me are 100% factual. I also have no desire to have any help from anyone. I would never ask anyone to do anything that I am not willing or capable of doing myself. And if I can do it myself then why would I ask someone to do it for me.
Sorry u/wilful. This comment is my new nicest thing ever said to me.
Kinda hard to misunderstand the meaning behind one word.
I keep telling you I will never be a man. Which means I will never earn more than minimum wage. 
I am already financially dominated by society
You could be a minimum wage fin dom enjoyer, just find an ugly girl
