
Gentlemen, this is democracy manifest.
Chinese restaurants are about to have a record night tonight in his honour.
Ladies and gentlemen, tonight we eat Chinese.
Rest in peace, legend. May the afterlife bring you an abundance of succulent Chinese meals, and those who are waiting to receive your limp penis.
Tata, and farewell

May he have many succulent Chinese meals
This does not affect my life in any way whatsoever and yet I'm devastated.

We demand a state funeral.
RIP.  I propose a national mourning holiday.
May the afterlife be prepared to receive your limp penis sir. RIP
#putoutyoursucculentchinesemeals
 
Oh man… I quote this guy at least once a week lmao. Won’t be the same now 😢 rip sir
Will be having Chinese at my judo club tonight
To be always remembered in the larrikan's hall of fame.
When ordering my Chinese meal tonight, I will ask: "WHAT IS THE CHARGE?"
make 8/8 Succulent Meal Day
Day ruined, this is not succulent news, get your hands off my cold dead heart
I am going to eat a succulent Chinese meal on his behalf, and then touch my penis, in his memory.  All for democracy.
All flags at half mast
Just want to recommend this podcast which goes into great detail about the event.  
[A Succulent Chinese Meal - ABC listen](https://www.abc.net.au/listen/programs/earshot/a-succulent-chinese-meal-viral-video-this-is-democracy-manifest/13678264)

It has some truly touching moments, almost brought a tear to my eye.
And at the pearly gates, Saint Peter he will tell, "Are you waiting to receive my limp soul? Ah I see you know your good men well."
Tis a sweet & sour day for Australia 
I work right next door to the place too. Might need to stop by when I'm next at the office
Vale you massive legend.

I’ll be grabbing a random man’s penis in tribute.
Public holiday please Mr. Albanese?

“Democracy Manifest Day” will do.
An Australian legend. My condolences to your nation. NZ mourns with you
Here's the link

https://youtu.be/PeihcfYft9w?si=1bEb4SY4ZojCXAGm
Has the judo gold medal match been played at the Olympics? If not, they need to do a minute silence for this great man. RIP king
They may have grabbed him by his penis, but he grabbed us by our hearts. Rest in peace, legend.
As an American I just want to thank Australia for giving  this gift of a man to the world. 

Yall did good.
I’m actually a little choked up. He was an internet meme but he brought such laughter and really showcased how out of this world us Aussies can be. RIP legend.
Ta ta and farewell Sir Jack Karlsson OSCM, DM, KLP, 

(Order of the Succulent Chinese Meal, recipient of Democracy Manifest, Knight of the Limp Penis)
There needs to be a national funeral
"I'm under WHAT?!"
Jack has got to be the most quoted Aussie ever -and what a quote! RIP to a legend & an icon 🍜🍆🇦🇺
The king of Australia is dead. God bless the king.
The mystery to me is why the original arrest footage was shown on the news in the first place. It must have been an extremely slow news day for a dine-and-dasher arrest to be considered a newsworthy event.
Everyone should go out and eat a succulent chinese meal tonight. Or grad a random stranger's penis in his memory.
WHAT IS THE CHARGE?
#limpdicksoutforkarlson
What was the cause of death? Eating a meal? A SUCCULENT CHINESE MEAL? 


Tis a sad day today! Rip legend!
The least succulent news I’ve heard all year 😕

RIP(enis), King.
Enjoy the succulent Chinese meal in the sky big fella....RIP.

Watch out for the Catholics though, they WILL try to touch your penis.
Eating a spice bag in Dublin in honour of the single greatest cultural phenomenia to come from this country.

I hope all meals hence force to be succulent and the police keep their hands off your penis. 

The world is a little darker but the memory shall never be forgotten.
May his afterlife be filled with succulent Chinese meals and judo. Thanks for the memes Jack
Fly high mate, may your Chinese meals be forever succulent 👍
He's eating succulent Chinese meals up in heaven now
I'ma grab some Chinese tonight in your honour mate
God…he literally did an interview with the cop that arrested him on one of the morning shows (I forget which one) a few weeks ago and he seemed alright. Crazy how quickly death can come. Rip legend.
Goodnight my sweet prince
Penises will be limp today. RIP
A succulent Chinese meal in his honour is on the cards for tonight
Today we not only mourn the loss of Jack Karlson but the death of aussie larrikinism. Taataa and farewell old mate
American Texan here: I often reference the “SUCCULENT CHINESE MEAL” and I’ve only gotten confused or concerned responses. Thanks Jack!
This is tragedy manifest.
Albo surely has to announce that going forth August 8 will be national succulent Chinese meal day.
May he and his penis rest in peace
Tonight I have decided to have a succulent chinese meal in memorium of a legend.
Not Australian, but I had to drop in to pay my respects to a legend of the internet.

Ta Ta, and farewell, Mr. Karlson. May you enjoy many succulent Chinese meals in the afterlife.
Yeah we need a public holiday for this. Democracy Manifest Day. The only shops allowed to open are Chinese restaurants. And we must attend morning service at a martial arts dojo. If we don't then the police have the authority to grab us by the penis people.
I'm getting a succulent Chinese meal tomorrow, and my girlfriend will receive my limp penis, also in honour of him.
All time best use of succulent in a sentence.
What's the charge? Being a legend? An iconic Australian legend? 😭
Tata and farewell, friend.
RIP.  You will live forever in our hearts.
I have taught my daughter to say this is democracy manifest every night before bed. She is now 4 and has been doing it for a couple of years.
Ironic, a man famous for eating a succulent chinese meal, died on one of the luckiest Chinese Calandar days 8/8.
This is a legend manifest!
Public holiday
I hope he gets his succulent chinese meal in peace now
He lived and died by the succulent Chinese meal 😔
RIP WORLDS greatest troll
“Of course, I was somewhat influenced by the juice of the red grape.“

What a treasure he was.
Put out your Succulent Chinese Meals in honour of this icon
Will be ordering a succulent Chinese meal tonight in his memory
AH WHAT THE FUCK

DEMOCRACY MANIFEST
Tonight, the succulent Chinese meal commences internationally
We gonna get a public holiday for this where we go out and get Chinese for dinner/lunch in his memory?
I wanna see the biopic…starring Hugh Jackman
I knew nothing about this guy until he was on the ABC morning news show quite recently. Apparently he & one of the cops became good friends.
Let us all have a succulent Chinese meal tonight
He's under what?
I hope his last meal was Succulent and Chinese,  RIP.
Heavenly manifest
I was just eating my succulent, Chinese dinner. Now it has been ruined. Woe is me.
All the local chinese takeaways are going to be super busy tonight and none of them will have a clue why
 Heaven just received his limp penis.  🙏
And you sir? Are you waiting to receive my limp penis?

Boss mode. Mic drop. game over.
Build this man a mememorial
We need a public day of mourning.
They were working on a documentary about his life which was announced recently. I hope it was put together before he passed because it sounds like he lived an entertaining life. What a legend.
Flags on the bridge had better be at half mast.
I guess the police finally let go of his penis. 


Enjoy your succulent Chinese meal where ever you are, dude.
Rest easy Jack, and enjoy that sweet juice of the red grape, wherever you might be.

Delivered one of the most memorable performances, and etched himself in to history as not only an Australian Icon, but an international icon.

Tata and farewell.
Put out your Chinese meals.
Every time Judo comes on the Olympics, I also think, "Ah yes. I see you know your Judo well." 
RIP legend.
Should be democracy manifesto day of mourning RIP
Everyone pour a succulent Chinese meal out tonight in honour of a great man.
RIP!
I swear I was just watching him do an interview a month or 2 ago. RIP legend
We lost a true Australian legend, may heaven have all the succulent Chinese meals he could enjoy
Farewell legend! I will honor you this evening with a succulent Chinese meal.
Put your chopsticks out for Jack 🥢
“Get your hands off my penis!” 😂😂
Bad day to be a Chinese Restaurant serving succulent food
Huge loss, a true gentleman..unhand me Sir!
Chinese takeaway it is tonight to mourn this bloody legend.
I see you know your Judo well.
Sad times. He can get a succulent Chinese meal in heaven 🫂
Tonight I shall have a succulent Chinese meal
Ta-ta and farewell!
This is the day that we all need to buy Chinese food in Jack's honour. RIP
I'll be enjoying a succulent Chinese meal this evening.
And so tonight, a succulent Chinese meal we shall have.
RIP.

No more inappropriately being touched on the penis.
Wait I’m actually sad
We should all enjoy a succulent Chinese meal in his honour. Everyone to your nearest Chinese buffet.
I demand that for today in lieu of the national anthem for any gold we win, this brilliant work of art is played for the world to enjoy
I'll fondly remember Jack; with tears in my eyes as they lower the coffin : 'and you sir; are you waiting to receive my limp penis?'
I only recently saw his GoFundMe page. RIP legend.
We have lost a legend among us
May you have many uninterrupted succulent Chinese meals in heaven good sir.
Vale Jack, a true cultural icon. 

Nothing is more quintessential Australian than Chinese takeaway meals & run-ins with the police...
RIP
I see you know your judo well.
You sir 👀
Succulent will forever suck more than it succs with his passing
Ahhhh yes… I see you know your judo well.

RIP to the most iconic Australian meme, and all around shady but lovely character.
o7



I think of this clip more often than you would expect




I hope his lord shouts him a succulent Chinese meal and a few glasses of wine on the side.

Democracy manifest indeed 
I honestly don't think he realised how many people thought he was a pure legend.
Tata and farewell
Well, I guess I’m having Chinese for dinner tonight! Last night’s leftovers will have to wait another day
I will put out my Chinese fortune cookie tonight! 🥠
This is devastating, and I'm not even Australian. RIP to a legend.
Are you waiting to receive my limp penis?
Im honour of this man, were gonna have a succulent chinese meal tonight!
Today should be a day of mourning :(
This is one tough look. Tata and farewell
Ta-ta and farewell.
I released a music video featuring his classic moment two days ago. Weird. 

“You’re under arrest”

“I’m under WHAT?”
Im curious about his accent. Was his considered a posh Australian accent?
rest up legend!
Tata and farewell, legend.
All he wanted was a succulent Chinese meal...
I wish there will be a succulent Chinese meal awaiting him in heavan for his arrival.
Rip to my hero. May he have succulent Chinese meals in heaven for eternity
I am going to drink an entire bottle of get your hands off of my pen-ot noir.
Yes succulent Chinese meals required to honour his passing
Rest in Limp Penis
What was his favorite meal to have at Chinese restaurants. Want to have it in his honour
Truly, this is mourning manifest.
Having a #39 in his honour
Put out your succulent Chinese meals
“Flags at the Olympic judo stadium will be at half mast”.
Ta-ta and farewell!
Ah yes, I see you know your judo well.
Ta ta, and farewell to our most succulent king!
RIP big guy, may all your meals be succulent up on the big cloud.
State Funeral. RIP to a real succulent one
The day democracy died.
Get Albo on the phone. I demand a national day of mourning. 

Succulent Chinese Meals all around in memory of the great one. This has made me profoundly sad. May our democracy forever manifest.
August 7 is now National Chinese Meal Day. Mark your calendars.
I just fell to my knees in a Chinese all you can eat restaurant 
Ahhh I see you know your Judo well.
Goodnight sweet prince.
I hope he enjoys his succulent Chinese meal in heaven, RIP!
He was an absolutely amazing guy. Meet him once and instantly recognised his voice across the bar.
Democracy Manifest has died today 😢
Put out your Dim Sims....
May he find the ultimate Chinese restaurant that serves the most succulent food and enjoy it while smiling down on our democracy being it's manifest best.

RIP you Aussie Legend!
He knew his judo well
Threadheads are about to have a record day selling their democracy manifest shirts
RIP to this legend. I’m going to say something profound in a Australian/british accent next time I get arrested with the hopes that someone is filming me
Anyone else reading these comments in his voice!?
Going out to have Chinese tonight
His date of death, 8/8/24, sounds like "prosper, prosper, starve to death" in mandarin (with slight variation to the intonation). 

Which is a bit of a coincidence given the succulent Chinese context. 



Source: Native mandarin speaker. 8 - 八 bā - 发 fā - prosper; 24 - 二四 èrsì - 饿死 èsǐ - starve to death
He's up in Heaven now having a succulent Chinese meal
He's in heaven enjoying succulent Chinese meals for the rest of eternity now. Rest in peace, Aussie legend!
We lost a legend today. 😥
A succulent Chinese meal will be had tonight mate and as that waiter comes up to my table, I shall grab his limp penis and democracy will manifest one last time for you sir! 

Rest easy
Mourning a Great Aussie Legend over the ditch here in Kiwiland.  Will defo be having a succulent Chinese meal tonight and pouring a red grape juice out for old mate
He has unironically brought me so much joy.
Australia needs a national day of mourning after losing one of our great meme icons. The country, and Chinese food, will never be the same. 😭
What is the charge? Having a funeral, a succulent Australian funeral
Called home to the big Chinese restaurant in the sky to feast on succulent meals for eternity. RIP
God is touching his penis now
Legend. Glad he got to see how legendary he was.
Aussie Legend
Democracy, this is a gentleman, manifested. The next succulent Chinese meal I consume I shall do so in your honour, ol Jack.
Tonight, we dine on a succulent Chinese meal in his honour.
RIP Greatest Bloke
Does anyone actually know what he was arrested for? 
I’ll be touching a penis tonight in his honour.
There’s been so many posts on this today. Am I the only one who’s never heard of him?
We all should have a nice, succulent Chinese meal tonight in his honour. I will be.
That is so so weird. I couldn’t sleep this morning and was thinking about the world and democracy then thought of him and thought someone should make him a poster boy for democracy right now. Wow
Ta ta and farewell :(
RIP, Mr Karlson may the heavens open up a succulent Chinese banquet and your penis always be unhanded.
The world is a little dimmer without you in it.
He did some interview semi recently and he seemed a bit confused RIP
Get a speaker in that coffin... This has to be done.
NOOOOOOOO!!!!
On the bright side he lived a long life. In this day and age it’s rather rare to kick it at 80’s
So sad....this is democracy manifest 😭😭😭
 No fucking way man…
Was he dining alone,  hope not, erudition like that needs an audience.
I suggest a Public holiday in his honour!
Take your hands off my p@nis’!
Get! your hands off my coffin!
Ohhh we are having a succulent Chinese meal for dinner tonight… RIP you bloody legend
I at least hope his wake is at the Chinese restaurant he was arrested at, if it’s still there
Sad stuff big rip in this day
let's just hope the mortician keeps his hands off his penis. 😞✊
“I can see you know your judo well.” 🤣
I see you know your judo well
A modern Australian tragedy, no doubt.
I feel this song is now a fitting tribute...

https://www.tiktok.com/@mossyrockk/video/7299201669869423905
His meal was the crime.”
rip
I'm actually going out for dinner tonight to enjoy a suculant Chinese meal. It'll be on him
I see you know your judo well
IM UNDER WHAT?!! 

RIP Legend
Tata and farewell
Rest in peace 🕊️
I’ll be having a succulent Chinese meal in his honour
Rip a true legend
It’s judo and Chinese meals with St. Peter tonight
RIP legend, I will never enjoy a succulent Chinese meal the same way again
He's gone to that great buffet in the sky. May he have a succulent eternal reward.
Rip
Damn
NOOOO
To a bloody true legend. Your legacy shall live on for ever in our countries history. We will continue your memory with every bite of a succulent Chinese meal we enjoy.
He needs a succulent Chinese meal name after him in his honour.
Grim reaper knew his judo well it seems.
So sad he is gone. I hope he gets all the succulent Chinese meals he ever wanted.
Blokes off to the biggest succulent chinese meal in the universe.
Good one.
Judo clubs everywhere will be saddened.
god got a hold of his penis now
He’s dining and dashing with the angels now
His name was Jack Karlson. His name was Jack Karlson. His name was Jack Karlson.
RIP to an absolute legend
RIP 😭
I just sent this clip to some friends about two weeks ago after having eaten a 'succulent Chinese meal'. Internet gold.
Everyone should toast to this man with a nice, suculant Chinese meal tonight..
[Orchestral Version](https://youtu.be/kuh_kmonJNw?si=LokRZ29PxyYfae6h)

RIP to a legend
Sad news. May he rest in eternal peace with a blissfully succulent Chinese meal at his side.
RIP ❤️😞😭
Tata, and farewell.
Put out your succulent Chinese meals
may you enjoy all the heavenly succulent chinese meals, Sir
Oh my…. Such great memories, one of the best internet moments ever . RIP
Rip 🪦
An, I'm kind happy the guy was found and knew he brought joy too a lot of people and even made some money from it.

Let's salute too a man who demands too talk to the peopel
Guy Williams is going to be upset.
RIP
People who know their judo well across the globe mourn Jack today 🥋
Man got a good laugh outta that incident. Take er easy Jack
Oh, my heart. We've lost a national treasure. 💔
RIP you king 👑
Rest well.
Bless him
I will forever sit and always eat a succulent Chinese meal. Just for Jack.
I actually met this man a few years ago. He was a great guy and a amazing artist.
RIP Jack. Have a drink waiting for me
Rip
🥡 he went to that big all you can eat Chinese buffet in the sky. Rest in peace hungry Hero 😔 🙏
This man is a national treasure 🥹
In honor of this gentleman of culture, I believe we should all go out, enjoy a succulent Chinese meal, and perhaps be asked to leave for not being able to pay. A non-violent, non-felony arrest would also work.
NOOOOOOOOOOOO
This true blue Aussie will be going straight to the giant pool room in the sky with all the other Aussie legends
Gentlemen, leave a succulent Chinese meal on the front porch in memory
RIP. Absolute legend.
Did a quick ctrl+f and didn't see anything about it, but I first heard the "succulent Chinese meal" quote in Mac Miller's (under his Larry Fisherman alias) mix Run on Sentences Vol 2, so RIP to this goofy Australian rogue, and RIP to Mac both.
Time for a SUCCULENT CHINESE MEEEEAL!
Hopefully, he had a succulent last meal
How depressing. May he rest in peace enjoying a succulent Chinese meal 💕
Thanks for the memes, the succulent Chinese memes
Memorial 4pm tomorrow at the Bellevue hotel in coominya
I’m making fried rice tonight and going to toast a succulent Chinese meal
I'll be thinking of Jack when I next tuck into a succulent Chinese meal. I watched an interview only a few weeks ago with Jack and the arresting officer of the time. In true form, Jack was hammered to the end. 

Tata ol mate
I just ate a succulent Chinese meal.
It's rumoured that he hopes that the Mortician was ready to receive his limp penis.
An interview on the Today show, more recently. RIP, mate [Here ](https://youtu.be/sV2l5Pol2-g?si=XEtXKvoTbxnhK4ck)
Ta Ta and Farewell
Tata and farewell
My family and I were talking about this Aussie icon recently and the very next day I came across this book by accident at the library: 

[Carnage](https://www.simonandschuster.com.au/books/Carnage/Mark-Dapin/9781761108099)
o7
Poor bugger ey at least he’s as I type enjoying a nice succulent Chinese meal in peace and quiet
He was only on the Today Show on TV the other week. A True Blue, Innocent, Dinky Die Honest Aussie Enjoying his Succulent Chinese Meal,
May he Rest in Peace 🙏🏻
this is anoxia manifest
Leave your succulent Chinese meals out in remembrance.
Ta-ta, and farewell!
I have been laughing so hard at this all day. I’d completely forgotten about it.
Rip hero
He will remain a staple part of popculture history.
Ta ta, and farewell
Needs aState funeral !!
I want this to be the most upvoted post on the sub
As an American, I can say that we consider this man one of Australia’s greatest gifts to the world. Tata, and farewell.
RIP, you magnificent bastard.
Ta-ta and farewell. Lived a long, succulent life.
Damn, Rest in peace
Albo should create a new public holiday in memory of this Australian legend 😅  
  
RIP Mr Karlson (if that was your real name).
May he enjoy all the succulent Chinese meals up there.

R.I.P. you Marvelous legend you.🙏🏿
may your penis rest forever limp, for god to receive.
Tata and farewell, you magnificent bastard.
After your succulent meal there will be someone awaiting to receive your flaccid penis..........
and they know there judo well
Rest in peace legend 😢
Must have a succulent Chinese meal in his honoror tonight. Vale!
Fucking legend 🫡
Wasnt this fella on the news recently about a so many years’ anniversary of that very succulent chinese meal? Very sad to hear this
He wasn’t as big, but a legend nonetheless in the US.   RIS big fella
Democracy manifest finally caught up to him.
Literally about to order some Yum Cha. Praise be JK Manifest.
I hope he enjoyed watching the judo competitions at Paris 2024 before the end. Respect, good sir.
I am limp in honour of this great, cultured man.
Noooooo
Paying my respects from Canada. Enjoyed a succulent Chinese meal for lunch yesterday.
NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO RIP KING
🫡
I swear he died a couple years ago
That sucks. RIP
I wish others would understand that this is what’s happening today
May your penis rest in peace.
RIP You great Australian, it’s gunna be s succulent Chinese night tonight. This should forever be a public holiday, surely even a posthumous knighthood is in order!!
What an absolute legend, humanity is worse off with his death. Respect to Jack Karlson from Norway.
Getting a succulent Chinese for dinner in his honour
Aw man, they finally got their hands on his penis.
Just don't dine and dash like ole Jack used to.
Your moms house in shambles

It’s a podcast
RIP legend! I hope you can get a lot of succulent chinese meals and match your skills with judo masters!
Hes a legend. Rest in peace.
Rest in peace to an absolute legend
just finished reading a book about him a few days ago, he lived a really interesting life besides that video. rest in peace.
May you continue to have many a succulent Chinese meal 🫡
GET YOUR HANDS OFF MY PENIS
I hope he's enjoying a succulent Chinese meal wherever he is.
Making a living from painting the arrest? Nope, guy painted porn lmao.
Can someone please start a subreddit based on this? It needs to be done.
Sad day for all Australians
I miss him
RIP you absolute legend
My heart is broken into a million pieces
The greatest moments in comedy history. I will never stop laughing at this. RIP you glorious bastard!
I met him once. While me and a workmate were opening the bar for the day he rocked up to one of the booths and sat down, and we weren't sure it was him until he bellowed out "COULD ONE OF YOU LITTLE GIRLS CALL ME CAB??" in *the* voice. We're both men. I will never forget it. 

RIP to a legend.
what fucking legend
Ta Ta and farewell Jack
One less succulent Chinese meal will be consumed daily.
Angel: "God, that guy you let in cuz you liked his video, he's stealing from the buffet."

God: "Alright, have him removed. Put him in purgatory for a few days to teach him a lesson."

Jack: "Get your hands off my penis! What is the charge? Eating a meal? A succulent Chinese meal?"
Rest in peace Jack Karlson, hope you can enjoy all of the succulent Chinese meals you want in heaven.
rest in piece democracy manifest guy enjoy youy succient chinese meal in heaven
what a beautiful voice!
Rip based man. Gonna have a succulent chinese meal today in your honor.
Now ill never know what the succulent Chinese meal consisted of 😔
DONT TOUCH MY PEEEEENUS!
I’ve just ordered a succulent Chinese meal. RIP to a true Aussie gentleman
Tonight we need to acknowledge Democracy Manifest and have a beer and a succulent Chinese meal in honour of the legend.
Noooo
Is this the succulent meal guy???
This man was an icon. Chinese in his honour
We are limp, while he is rigid. 

This is Australia Manifest!
Ta ta, and farewell. He knew his judo well.
Move over Ned Kelly.
I did, in fact, see that man touch his penis.
What’s the charge now?
Hijacking top comment with original video


https://youtu.be/PeihcfYft9w?si=zDzqqtKIgK2gBjmp
rest in penis
August 7 is now National Chinese Meal Day. Mark your calendars.
Gentlemen, this is democracy tragedy
Gonna have a succulent chinese meal after work tonight O7
8th August will forever be Succulent Chinese meal day.
Getting some rainbow beef and spring rolls to honour the lad.
A sad day to remember the good times
I am literally waiting for Chinese at my local in Brisbane right now (only saw this after ordering) and holy shit they are run off their feet.
record for most dine and dashes in a single night?
Yes it's the right thing to do.
Only the succulent ones
I just finished a succulent Chinese meal for lunch. And while I intended on having leftovers tonight, but democracy manifest calls upon me for a fresh meal.
To truly honour his spirit we're going to have to be escorted out by police.
I was thinking about getting some chinese food actual. I do enjoy a chinese meal.
Chinese takeaway is considered a luxury nowadays. The prices are insane.
I intend to make this a yearly commemorative family tradition moving forward. 

RIP succulently mate 🫡
First thing I thought: Chinese tonight for dinner!
#putyourdimsimsout
The succulent ones
Get your hands on my penis… gone too far?
Yeah, no joke. Was gonna have sushi for lunch, but chose to forgo it and have chinese tonight. Maybe take the missus out
Old m8 be eating succulent Chinese meals in heaven. 
we need matt berry to reenact this.
Very poetic til the end. RIP
Off to the succulent Chinese meal in the sky
A funeral? A tasteful Australian funeral?

GET YOUR HAND OFF MY CASKET
Came here to suggest a state funeral as well.
Yep. Every man and his dog has a state funeral these days. The People’s Champion deserves one too.
Same. My husband and I communicate through quotes of that video. Jack gave us some good laughs.
Legit, if Albo did it, I reckon that would win him the next election alone
National Succulent Chinese Meal Day!
Put together a quick petiton using chatgpt
https://www.change.org/p/grant-a-state-funeral-for-aussie-legend-jack-karlson
Who will supply the succulent Chinese meal for the wake?
Once you've had a State funeral, you feel like another one 20 minutes later.
I’ll actually be disappointed if this isn’t in the main headlines in the news tonight haha
I say two. One for succulent Chinese meal and another for judo day where everyone says I see you know your judo well after a judo battle.
State funeral
We’re mourning in Canada as well
International holiday*
I unironically think they should build a statue of him in the Valley Mall. He's iconic.
I think I’ll call one in tomorrow and order in some succulent Chinese and practice my judo! 

The man. The legend. 

Gentleman, this is indeed, democracy manifest! RIP Sir. You may be gone, but your quotes on these subs will never end.
How daaaaare you.
I mean, its surely stiff by now, but the sentiment is touching
Putoutyourpenises doesn’t have the same ring to it
As you wish
Same
It will be better as your carrying on his legacy

Many succulent Chinese meals to you sir
Make sure police do not have their hands on your p@nis!
Ironically enough 8 is a very auspicious number in China. 

I see Karlson knows his Chinese culture well.
And all the numbers in 2024 add up to 8.

Coincidence? I think not!
Australia Day date debate now solved
May your penis stay limp and your Chinese meals be succulent 

Tata 
Is that a "limp penis" reference?
Are you prepared to receive my flag at half mast?
I wish this comment was right at the top, everyone who's enjoyed the meme should listen to this. Amazing story and handled beautifully by the podcast.
Peter takes offense, is about to send him to hell...

heard inside the pearly gates: "Get your hand off my penis!!!"
*bittersweet & sour
Leave some flowers by the door
I offer my limp penis in tribute to your tribute.
https://www.aph.gov.au/parliamentary_business/petitions
Ta ta, and farewell! 
that's amazing, can't believe i'd never seen it before
I’ve been laughing at that video for over 15 years now. A true legend. May his limp penis be received by his afterlife of choice and a succulent Chinese meal eaten by all in his honor.
I’ve been cracking up about this guy since I was a kid, long, long before I knew I would even wind up in Australia. 

He was one of the perfect little slithers of the golden age of the internet: the turn of the millennia, when things were evolving rapidly and prior to the explosion and commercialisation and centralisation of internet resources. 

I moved here about ten years ago, and was so happy to see how embraced he was by actual Australians. 

RIP to a Legend and a figure from better, simpler, happier times.   

Ta ta and farewell, sir; good one.  👋🥲
I am not Australian but this video and the no agents/Asians video always brought a smile to my face whenever I would be having a bad day
What happened was he was doing low level credit card fraud. The fraud investigator was able to track him down and called the police and claimed it was a major most wanted person so they would put effort in. So the police went down, with the news called.

The police did arrest him, though it was discovered that he wasn't the big criminal they were told he was, he was still a criminal.
It was a combination of "camera crew filming something else, just happened to be there" and "tv news is a visual medium so anything with footage gets priority."

It was reported as a dine-and-dash but the reality was he was wanted on multiple outstanding warrants. There's a blog somewhere by one of the arresting officers

Edit: found the article, you have to register to read it
https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2022/june/dean-biron/succulent-chinese-meme#mtr

The gist is he was wanted on 19 counts of fraud and receiving stolen goods, totalling $70,000 (a fair chunk of money in 1991), spent the night in the watchouse, was released by mistake the following morning before his court appearance, and then disappeared for a couple of decades until he became a meme
EATING A MEAL?!
I do wonder what this means for the documentary they were spruking at the time. 

I dunno, Jack looked very weary and out of it compared to his interviews a few years back (2022?). He'd been battling prostate cancer since a diagnosis earlier this year, and I think you could see its toll on him. 

A good reminder for all the blokes out there to talk to your GP, and get a finger up your bum... For Jack.
But did he receive his flaccid penis?
His penis is in gods hands now
Eating a succulent Chinese meal.
Having advances stage prostate cancer and the sentence is life support off unfortunatly. 

RIP to an Aussie legend.
I see you know your url well
Please receive my limp comment
Surely you mean tragedy manifest
And receive a limp penis too?
I’m honestly for that, considering the fact that 8/8 (which puts together as 88) symbolizes fortune and good luck in Chinese culture, as the Chinese word for 8 (八) is phonetically similar to the word 发, or prosperity.

If eating a succulent Chinese meal during that blessed day means potential prosperity, then why the hell not?
Honestly, we should make it a yearly holiday. Great way to remember, great for our local Chinese restaurant(s)!
in case you were unaware he wasn't a dine and dasher. The police got the arrest wrong
Why would there be dine and dashes? He wasn't a dine and dasher.
#putyourlimppenisesout
They aren’t firm enough…
Only if it's limp.
Heaven deserves more Chinese meals
I see you know your last rites well
Casket is a Chinese takeaway box
Ahhh yes, I see that you know your partner *well*.
Let's get this going
It was one of the main headlines on channel 7 at 9am, that’s how I found out. So I assume it’ll be national news tonight
Black armbands are being handed out to our Olympic athletes.
 *I see you know your judo well* should be engraved on the Judo medals at the 2032 Olympics.
Bless you.  A worldwide mourning holiday?
And it's been done.

Dicks out for Harambe
Limp penises
You can say “penis”
Leave some succulents by the door
From my understanding he was completely innocent and the police mistook him for the guy with outstanding warrants. I could be wrong though.
A SUCCULENT CHINESE MEAL?!
No, but he knew his Judo well.
How dare you sir.. it was a succulent meal!
I see you know your judo well
A succulent judo meal
I’m just here to apparently watch a training video on Judo.
Nah chicken’s feet please
Man was born in 42, died in 24.  It's gotta be a sign.
 we need to take this all the way to our member of parliament! 

ALBO! ALBO!
Actually they didn't. There was a charge: For eating a meal. A succulent Chinese meal.
[removed]
Limppenisoutforjack
But who will receive them?
Heaven just got another limp dick succulent angel. 😇 🙏 
He has told me once or twice to "get your hands off my penis!" (in jest, I promise).
they interviewed him on the radio a few weeks ago. He was a genuinely interesting, charming and funny fellow 

RIP legend
It should definitely be on 7 because Chris Reason was a rookie reporter that reported it back in the early 90s I think
Imagine foreign news services trying to explain that!
Black cock rings
But disappointed Tom Craig wasn't carrying on like that during his arrest...
Yeah, instead of putting it on all the diving medals 🥇. It’s democracy manifest for limp shrimp.🦐
The English speaking parts anyways. Unless the video has been translated but even then it would lose a lot of its brilliance.
Nah, the "innocence" thing was just later spin, they had the right man. It's just in the context of broader crimes he wasn't worth pursuing further - he kept his head down and the police had more on their plate.
Nah he had outstanding warrants. 

He was a career crook.
THIS IS DEMOCRACY MANIFEST
There's the man who touched me on the penis
to add to this theory, Jack was featured in a music video by aussie punk band The Chats. the song is fittingly called [Dine And Dash](https://youtu.be/I3jAJHRW_Yo?si=TqWqA6WaUOe3rjwB)
Do it for long enough and a cop will arrive to man handle you.
Spare yourself the book then - a tedious read....
One bloke just has to go by and scream GET YO HANDS OFFFF MYY PEEENISSSS...
I'd love to hear that video dubbed into different languages
ne touche pas mon pénis
While this is cool, the chats are the group who discovered his identity and made it public. The fact they made a song title after what he was accused of and arrested for… just makes sense, without the conspiracy.
As long as they know their judo well
