
This is great to see a payrise for childcare teachers, they absolutely deserve every penny..


Unfortunately, it's parents who are going to pay for this pay rise in a  in a year's time when the agreement to not raise  fees stops.
This is a terrible initiative. Why set a cap at anything above zero? Why guarentee that we will see a 4.4% increase in fees next year? Why pay wages on behalf of a private company instead of nationalise childcare like people have been asking for for years now?
This industry really needs to be shut down/ nationalised and control given to the state education bodies.
An entire industry where the people who own it get to walk away with millions all while getting taxpayers to fund their business and pay their staff. Despicable thieves.
Childcare subsidies are yet another taxpayer funded benefit to employers. If you don't believe me, then why not pay it DIRECT to the stay-at-home parent?????
election coming
Not sure if my kids centre was expecting this, at the start of the financial year they jacked their prices 23% and weren't giving payrises to staff which resulted in nearly all of them quitting over the past 6 months.
Well they can kiss my ass then greedy fuck. Childcare costs enough as it is. Can't afford to pay much more. May as well be home with the kids on the dole then be at work working.
100% agree that these guys deserve the pay rise.
I do think though that parents do need to pay more as the rest of us already subsidise a lot of it.
Yes, it’s a business not a human service.
Nationalising it would be ideal, but it would probably turn into the same debacle as the current unfair State school/private schools funding.
The more subsidies the government provides , the more childcare would charge and pocket all the gains . This is exactly what has happened in the  last year when the government announced more subsidies except that no pay increase for the workers . More subsidies => prices increase => parents pay the same after subsidies but tax payers subsidy for that . It’s a poor policy which allows private providers to rot the system and no gains for anyone . The whole thing should just be ran by government but we are too deep in with private providers now . Then they wonder why young people can’t afford to have kids .
Yes, and if it can't pay people a living wage it shouldn't exist. I'm all for capitalism just not at the expense of fucking people over.
Spoken like someone who doesn't have children in childcare.
Probably but I don't see how paying the wages of private companies employees is better. 


I'd rather see a review into what proportion of fees are going to wages and what is proportion is going to exec pay and profits.
>Yes, and if it can't pay people a living wage it shouldn't exist.

Industries that the market is telling us to close:

* Healthcare
* Childcare
* Education

Let's close those industries and reskill all the workers in those industries into consulting or landlording. Unions need to threaten much more serious and indefinite labour deprivation where nobody wants to pay properly for that labour. It's not any individual worker's job to subsidise economic mismanagement by providing below-cost labour.
Are you willing to provide childcare labour at current pay rates? Would you be comfortable with your spouse or child pursuing a career in that industry? If not, you can't expect someone else to subsidise your lifestyle by providing childcare labour for less than it costs to enjoy a decent standard of living.
> Spoken like someone who doesn't have children in childcare.

I don’t approve of exploiting a human need, whether it I’ve for childcare, for aged care, or for earning a living wage - all issues which revolve around the traditional gendered roles fulfilled by females. Whether or not I have children in childcare isn’t relevant nor is it any of your business.
I agree with you that nationalising it is a good idea, so long as it doesn’t turn into the kind of two-tier system of privilege our schools currently run under.
> Industries that the market is telling us to close:
> 
> Healthcare

> Childcare

> Education

I agree with you entirely. Also Housing.

How have we managed to fuck this up so badly? This a massive proportion of the work force that has aways been there, and now we can't get the work done. I don't see any serious public policy discussion of this.

We need to pay more. That would involve pulling money from other places which will then scream.

We need more labour. Where will the labour come from given that unemployment is low? If we bring more people into the country we also add to the pressure on these services, so I don't see that as a solution.

We need to make the jobs more attractive by decreasing responsibilities and time commitments. That means the scopes of the jobs need to decrease and the consumers need to suck it up.

We need to approach the labour market holistically, rather than handing out cash to whoever's screaming at the moment.
Is there any significance to leaving out aged care?
>I don’t approve of exploiting a human need

Until that principle applies equally to housing, I don't think we can blame workers for being ruthless in negotiating the price for their labour. Workers are not afforded any relief from corrupt housing market conditions, why should they provide any charity on the price of their labour?
Nationalising it would remove the tiers. That's one of the main reasons we also need to nationalise education.
>We need to pay more. That would involve pulling money from other places which will then scream.

IMO there is a lot of fake 'productivity' in our economy, which doesn't actually sew any t shirts, build any cars, cook any meals, maintain any roads or unclog any sewers. For example, a lot of consultants are paid massive amounts to do fuck all, or to write reports that aren't needed. All of those people (and others, whose jobs don't produce anything that contributes to the standard of living of other Australians) need a very serious reality check as to the need for their 'productive' output and hence the fair market price for their output.
You seem to have missed out aged care e.g., -

> Brightwater to close three aged care homes as sector grapples with staffing requirements

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-04-14/brightwater-to-close-three-perth-aged-care-homes/102224098
No. I also left our firefighters, paramedics... probably others.
I have no evidence that that's true, but I'm sure there are a lot of useless people out there somewhere. My hope is that if we were to analyse the labour market we'd see the massive lump of consultants and (for example) the government would say "fuck it we're not paying for that any more the money is better spent elsewhere."

Of course, lots of people would prefer to be a highly-paid consultant rather than a nurse, and I feel like that's a large part of the problem.

I agree, we need a massive reality check on what services are worth providing. I see so much money wasted in my own job when clients duplicate my work (badly) to change the colours or something pretty much unnecessary.
I remembered that one from a couple of weeks ago when I calculated that Aged Care employed 3.5% of the work force and somehow that's not enough. It's bizarre.

But in this case I was happy to fold that into healthcare.
My list was not at all intended to be exhaustive.
You covered paramedics with ‘healthcare’. ☑️ for firefighters.
