
X is absolute shit. I made one comment on a post about a Chinese athlete in the Olympics and now my home feed is bombarded by state propaganda accounts. It's by far worse for misinfo than anything, even 4chan.
X is primarily a platform to promote rumours and misleading information. That's why the Muskrat bought it.
“The No campaign’s messaging on X cultivated an atmosphere of scepticism and inquiry, leveraging the conditions of a ‘regime of post-truth’ (Harsin, 2018) marked by diminishing trust in scientific expertise and governmental authority. “

No shit? 

I’m sorry but this is just “research” on keywords.

If you want to change the constitution you need to overcome baseline scepticism.

Keywords are not proof of rumors or misinformation.
So, for the no campaign

"Such claims are indisputably conspiratorial because they assert that powerful actors are hiding malevolent agendas and because they lack credible and verified empirical evidence."

But the yes campaign was all based on credible and verified empirical evidence? No, it was all about the right thing and the vibe.

The whole thing was arse about. The voice should have been constructed to show people what they were voting for and then, at the next election, hold the referendum.

This would have shown people with credible and verified empirical evidence of what the voice should be and what it will do.
Thankfully X isn't that widely used in Australia. 

It's usage stat's are about the same as Pinterest and LinkedIn.
The piece seems biased and poorly researched in some areas. Quite frankly, I don't think anyone can claim they fully understand what happened. 

One point, though. Early on, the Yes campaign said that it doesn't make sense to do all the work until they got a mandate. The No side pointed out that if they had done more work, people would be able to understand what they were voting for (or at least see a draft). This aspect does not appear to be in debate...
Hey OP, is this your job?
This makes sense as the "yes" campaign had very poor media qualities during their campaign. Meanwhile the "no" campaign didn't really exist as an organised entity, it was a lot of different people with different, often conflicting, opinions letting them be known to whoever cares to read/listen to them.

It's a bit of a problem unique to the referendum process though, one side is campaigning for change, while the other wants to maintain the status quo. Maintaining the status quo doesn't need to be justified, shooting down the proposal for change is what needs to happen. This is different to how normal political campaigning should be made to work (though it doesn't), where once again you're proposing change, or new ideas, but both side are doing the same. If we restricted political advertising and campaigning to that view, only what they will do moving forward, it resolves a lot of the issues around mid/disinformation of opponents.
The Yes campaign kicked off by telling people they weren't smart enough to understand the details - just vote for it & we'll tell you later. The entire rest of the campaign was just trying to claw it's way back from alienating everyone.

How about the bright spark who approved that initial media statement take some blame?
Christ will someone tldr this for me? I’ve had a long day.
> We can’t really call it “disinformation” because most of it didn’t involve outright falsehoods
"...they created an environment where multiple – often conflicting – versions of the truth competed for dominance..."


That's just the nature of truth though. When you get a clear, simple narrative it's because what you are hearing isn't true. Life is irreducibly complex.
Ohhh. It’s all Twitter’s fault. And nothing to do with the typical barrage of abuse people would cop if they asked for more information. It’s been solved.
Isn’t x pretty much bots arguing with each other these days?
There are codes of conduct and ethical standards in traditional forms of media and journalism that have been put in place to protect vulnerable members of the community and news sources. Social media is an alternative free for all that relies on the whims of the private corporation that owns it to govern what is said and how they tailor their algorithms to promote particular points of view.

I think there seems to be no real understanding for how this shapes societal perceptions and behaviours and the real world problems that are caused by the spread of misinformation and disinformation; aka lies.

Recent UK riots are an example of this. Oh gee, look ma now there's riots. No, rapid spread of lies unleashing riots and destruction is an inevitable outcome when long pent up feelings of anger and rage have finally hit boiling point after long having been built up and reinforced repeatedly on online social networks for many years.
As much as people rag on X, I'd much rather have it. It's always good to read Reddit's little echo chamber on an issue and then read the echo chamber on X and form some sort of truth that lies somewhere in the middle.

Argue all you want that X is shit but this place isn't much better on a lot of topics.

Any online community has the minority of a topic being stamped down and silenced so they go elsewhere, they get sick of interacting with the opposition. Then you get massive echo chambers where everyone jerks each other off and works each other up until they hate the opposition.

Such is the internet of 2024 and if this post is downvoted for saying exactly that then it just proves me right.

The internet used to be a place where you could disagree with someone on an issue and not shout them down to the point that anyone who thinks that way flees. Seems like the default stance for netizens nowadays.
I have a simple explanation - what was originally supported was different to the proposal that came to be
Twitters always been like this. Long before musk bought it. 
Misinformation, AI and bots might be the best thing to happen to all the major sites in the long run. If they're all shite enough they'll just die.
So daily disinformation broadcasts by Sky News 24/7 did not contribute. I think if you run the numbers it propaganda by Sky News and their anti voice campaign that did the most damage.
They're still malding lmao
> Properly diagnosing the problem is the first step to remedying it.

what problem? both YES and NO campaigns were orchestrated by Albanese so that he could continue to ignore the indigenous people while standing next to them with false compassion to influence the votes of the demographic. Conspiratorial for sure however not very hard to see the clandestine ambition of a failing government. Their "A Better Future." slogan used in Albaneses campaign was under fire as inflation rose and people suffered instead of realizing his promise "Australia the doors of opportunity are open to us all".

There was no problem, he had no plan in the event that we voted YES. The end result of a vote in favour was to define the outcome after the motion was accepted. He basically said, let's vote and we'll decide what that means later.

He hit the indigenous square in the guts and made it look like he had nothing to do with it by standing next to them shrigging his shoulders, washing his hands of the "peoples" decision. What a piece of s......
Most of 4chan uses little signifiers to show that they're teenagers who've just learned what extremist propaganda is and are using it like a child uses a swear word. Twitter posters are adults with no excuse.
I can't fathom why anybody, let alone journalists, politicians and otherwise reputable people and organisations are still willing to use it. I deleted my account pretty soon after Musk bought it, and I have zero interest in using the platform for anything at all now.
Without context this comment could be misinformation.
But he's the first line of defence against the woke mob /s
That, and to do stock market manipulation. 
You could have said the same thing about the republic referendum and that was in 1999 - predating social media. It'd be a tough case to make that it only went down because people were manipulated. 

The referendum set back reconciliation 30 years - it was a terrible decision to have it and we got an entirely  predicable outcome. What's more we aren't getting a legislated Voice nor a Marrakata commission (or any treaty discussions) as a direct consequence - and likely never will. Good job Albo.
Isn't scepticism and inquiry a good thing?
It's always funny when academics analyse this and wonder how people didn't act in accordance with the shloppenbauer principle or the Beckham ratio. Like no shit Sherlock, Susan from Tullah, Tasmania has different concerns than some abstract morality or thesis lmfaooooo
100% The whole YES campaign was just "Vote YES or you're racist" and "it just the right thing to do". Without any real 'showing' what it was or how it'd work. 

The bag was definitely fumbled by Labor. Which is surprising because they're generally quite good at 'boiling the frog' and pushing the nation forward. Whilst not pissing off large corps that can sway an election.
Here’s the stats for Jan 2024

https://www.genroe.com/blog/social-media-statistics-australia/13492
> The piece seems biased and poorly researched in some areas.

I think not -

> I [Timothy Graham, Associate Professor in Digital Media, Queensland University of Technology] collected 224,996 original posts on X (excluding reposts) containing search terms relevant to the referendum (for example, “Voice to Parliament” or #voicereferendum). The data collection spanned all of 2023 up to the referendum date on October 14. It included more than 40,000 unique user accounts.

Looks pretty exhaustive to me.

You write -

> The No side pointed out that if they had done more work, people would be able to understand what they were voting for (or at least see a draft). This aspect does not appear to be in debate...

The article states -

> I [author] found the “no” campaign keywords occurred more than four times as often in the dataset as the “yes” campaign’s, with the “not enough details” and “voice of division” narratives most prevalent of all.

It seems to me you swallowed that particular ‘No’ line whole and undigested: all that voters needed to understand was whether or not Aboriginal Peoples should have a voice in their own matters. If voters really cared about the details of these matters they’d have familiarised themselves with same over the preceding years, there’s plenty of material available in the public sphere for them to do so. The ‘yes’ or ‘no’ choice was not about these details at all, it was about having a voice.
His job is to constantly complain on this sub apparently.
> Meanwhile the "no" campaign didn't really exist as an organised entity,…

You have a source for that?

Meanwhile,

> Fair’s website includes images of the former Coalition prime minister Tony Abbott and Liberal senator Alex Antic alongside Nampijinpa Price, Mundine, and Long. However, those two Coalition politicians haven’t officially put their names to the campaign.

https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/feb/20/voice-referendum-whos-behind-the-yes-and-no-campaigns-and-how-do-they-plan-to-convince-australia

It’s darkly comical how the pack on this sub tear into Gina Rinehart  whenever the topic comes up, yet fall into line like puppets with her and her ilk’s agenda re the No campaign.
That's simply nonsense. All of the necessary structure of the Voice was there in the amendment. Constitutional scholars backed it. The framework it provided would have enabled the legislation to put the Voice to Parliament into place, and the working model of that was provided in the Empowered Communities design report. This would have needed to have been ratified by Parliament as the operation of the Voice would be subject to the democratic process.


>The Yes campaign kicked off by telling people they weren't smart enough to understand the details - just vote for it & we'll tell you later.


This **never** happened, and demostrates how effective the disinformation around the Voice referendum was. 
> However, my research, published in the journal Media International Australia, highlights how misinformation and conspiratorial narratives on social media platforms – in particular, X (formerly known as Twitter) – also played a key role.
I don't really think this is right. Life is incredibly nuanced and complex but it doesn't mean high level abstractions that are simple are not true, for all intents and purposes. You can let semantics make anything fuzzy but it's just being obtuse. The earth is a sphere, well no it's an ellipsoid, one is more scientifically accurate but both are true.

I don't mean to be going on a tangent and I'm not commenting on the issue at hand, I just think the statement 

> When you get a clear, simple narrative it's because what you are hearing isn't true.

Is a nonsense principle.
> When you get a clear, simple narrative it's because what you are hearing isn't true. Life is irreducibly complex.

Complex, but not “irreducibly so”, nor are we passive receptors of your “clear, simple narrative”. We construct our own meanings. Individual choice plays a part.

https://www.buffalo.edu/catt/teach/develop/theory/constructivism.html#
We should apply the same rules to the nuclear argument.  If we don't know (the cost) we should vote no.
Seems to be a sensitive subject.
Evidently not. The owner for example has also been muck stirring -

> No 10 criticises Elon Musk for ‘civil war is inevitable’ post on England riots

https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/article/2024/aug/05/no-10-criticises-elon-musk-post-x-riots
Nobody was unbiased in this. Including the ABC. Don't you remember how they behaved during the interviews? They had to appogise for that.
All true.
>  It's always good to read Reddit's little echo chamber on an issue and then read the echo chamber on X and form some sort of truth that lies somewhere in the middle.

Or you could just use your god given brain and dont make society changing decisions based on ANY social media sources, because they are not only uneducated echo chambers but filled full of paid bots off creating such echo chambers for entire continents away.

No it is being downvoted because of the inanity of using any social media as an informed source.

> It's always good to read Reddit's little echo chamber on an issue and then read the echo chamber on X and form some sort of truth that lies somewhere in the middle.

That sounds like insanity.
Not sure why you're being downvoted. There's a pretty clear shift in polling results from before the wording to after
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opinion_polling_for_the_2023_Australian_Indigenous_Voice_referendum
Dutton also sold people a counter-proposal that he had no intention of actually supporting...
You’d think so, but it seems a number of people don’t care about truth or falsehoods, maybe they need the entertainment or all the drama in their lives.
The article is focusing on X though, not Sky News?
er what? ... sounds like it is a 'take a Bex and have a good lie down' time for you.
That's great, Grandpa - but tell us again how the Masonic Rosicrucian Zionists have been flooding the country with African gangs spreading peanut allergies, will you? 🙄
Or more likely bots, trolls and state sponsored propagandists.
Because it is still the largest social media network of its kind, and when you need to reach people you gotta go where the people are. It's supposed replacements, mastodon and bluesky, are *miniscule* in comparison. They're growing, but are still a long way off from the kind of population base needed for people to be able to cut off their Twitter accounts and still have similar reach.

People whose livelihoods depend on reach - freelancers, basically - might run simultaneous accounts on all three sites, but I'll bet good money that the majority of their traffic is still coming from Twitter. 

Plus, Twitter is still plenty functional. We see a lot of the bullshit that goes on get in the news, or get posted to subreddits, but a lot of people who are just using it to follow their favourite artists or celebs will not actually be seeing too much objectionable stuff, since their online experience is still relatively curated. A bit, sure, but not *that* much more than you see on Facebook or Reddit.
Without context _this_ comment could be misinformation
From my point of view the Jedi are evil!
What? That Elon Musk bought Twitter to turn it into a cesspool?
I'm not sure if that could have been said in 1999?
Yes but it can be missapplied like “Is the Earth really round?” or “Are you sure the world is warming, I mean I had to wear an extra layer today.”

There’s skepticism and inquiry in a scientific manner and there’s just plain shitposting based on gotchas.
The voice was literally left open to interpretation and could have any form. It's hard to dispel lies when there is no one truth.

I think Labor could see the voice as an easy vote winner prior to the election, they can hold a referendum on an easy topic and notch up a win.

The downfall for Labor was Albo saw it as an enduring legacy and inserted Labor into it losing good will and political points so the rest of the term is lame duck.
... and it seems you listen to the "Yes" side... Like most of the population, I started out thinking I'd vote yes, tried to get my head around it and voted No. 

Something can still be poorly researched if you ignore a lot of the material. Or critically don't understand why someone is doing something. Though sorry, I could have phrased the original sentence more politely. Maybe my journey(a person who went from Yes to No) will help you understand some of the texture. 

The not enough detail is indeed critical. I explained how both sides addressed this publically.  

You also came to a conclusion about what the voice was and what it allowed. Even top constitutional lawyers needed to get involved to help people understand that. Don't forget that it was a grey area if voting "yes" meant we would be giving all three steps a mandate or if it was just for the voice. I concluded it was for all of it (long term). 

Another key aspect was the extra documents outlining the discussions of meetings. From this, the statement from the heart was formed. Now I took the time to read these ( the longest was only 23 pages, I think), and let's say it's not all harmonise stuff. Though it's fair to say these are not what was signed off on. Though Albo said he never read them as the statement from the heart was the conclusion. Now... I find that suspicious. He didn't read them? Well even I did. Though he called them the conclusion, so that means he thinks they directly helped form the statement from the heart. But didnt read them?... Doesn't pass the pub test.... As you can see, very little of their content is about a voice. Critically, at this point (in my mind), all trust in Albonese (in regards to this topic) had evaporated. 

Next I looked into the architects of the voice. Quite a few had expressed concerning things in their past. From (questionable statements about Australians themselves - I'm not accusing anyone of anything) to seemly thanking the communists party for help in this and explaining how to create power bases. The character of those involved came into question... While you could argue it was a smear campaign, most were literally on video saying these things. Some even explaining how the voice will be used like a "hook" to do another things (though what it would do, and how much power it would have, seemed to change through time - before the public announcement). 

I did a lot of research into this myself. My heart wanted to vote yes, but I looked for due diligence. The more I looked the more I knew No was the correct answer. So I looked for where I went wrong, still wanting to vote Yes.

It came down to trust. I didn't trust those involved because of what they had said.

Another key aspect is that you seem to believe, seemingly wholeheartedly, what the truth is (you even gave me a clear cut explanation). You seem to believe those who searched for the No messages got converted into No voters. Do you still feel that is what happened to me? I would have searched No terms more in an attempt to debunk them. Again most people started out as Yes voters. These terms "misinformation" and "disinformation" are thrown around a lot. Though two rational people can be given excatly the same information and can form different (rational) perspectives. Some may have been OK with the voice, but felt it gave a soft "yes" for future action they didn't agree with, while a hard No wouldn’t. There is a lot of texture to this.

Though I will close by saying, research like yours is important. It was a historic moment, and I firmly believe most people (including myself) still don't fully understand it. Maybe, you are educated and intelligent enough to fully understand it, unlike myself. In which case the failure was in their ability to explain it to the average person.
Pretty sure that B0ssc0 has previously said they are female.
isnt complaining on this subreddit everyone's job?!
There was a No team on the right(as you mentioned) and there was also one on the left, whose most famous face was Lidia Thorpe. While the Yes had one set of faces, one perspective, No had at least two totally different teams/arguments.
The first launch of the Yes website explicitly explained why they didn't do all the work as (something like) " it doesn't make sense to do all the work before a mandate". This later got removed. Though the Yes side started out admitting that they hadn't got everything sorted... There will be an internet record of that somewhere. 

I agree they didn't outright say the population was too dumb (from what I watched). Though there was an implication of it. Like, we shouldn't bother understanding it. It's not something we should be concerned with. They'll sort that out for us after we voted for them.
When it was announced one of the first people interviewed was a woman associated with the project who said it doesn't matter what it contains, just vote yes. 

It wasn't an official government stance. But it was one of the very first interviews on the morning ABC news commentary. My first introduction to it & I immediately said to my husband that they lost it right there. 

I can't be the only person who remembers this. It isn't the Sinbad movie.
From the [actual journal publication](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1329878X241267756)

> **We conclude with a key provocation: the No campaign's misleading messaging on X was not predicated on outright falsehoods. Our findings suggest that it primarily relied on the systematic and strategic spread of unverified rumours and claims, as well as the weaponisation of context, serving as a form of attention management in Australia's hybrid media system.** This places the campaign squarely within the conceptual remit of propaganda (Harsin, 2024), but with new socio-technical configurations and post-truth possibilities. **Such tactics entangled fact-checkers and provoked opponents into participating and contributing to the oxygen of amplification** (Phillips, 2018). We observed a highly polarised communication environment in the dataset under examination, with little or no meaningful dialogue between the Yes and No campaigns evident in the topic model analysis. One might argue that these attention management strategies are therefore anti-deliberative and may only serve to worsen distrust and political polarisation. **We speculate that the No campaign's narrative of ‘social division’ became a self-fulfilling prophecy, as the emphasis on division and scepticism not only framed the discourse but also amplified and entrenched the very polarisation it predicted,** providing few opportunities for cross-cutting agreement and constructive dialogue. **While it remains unclear how much impact social media had on the referendum's outcome, platforms like X play an integral role in new configurations of propaganda that require urgent attention.**


In other words, they can't keep blaming the twitter/x no campaign for lying, so now they blame them for making the twitter/x yes campaign actually put in work defending their position.

Then say they don't know how much of an affect on the results it had anyway.
We are getting that a lot in /r/australia too, seems like every day someone posts something to get the anti gov conspiracy theories going.

Awful thing is there's clearly a market for this, various anti government youtubers making big sums of money on Patreon 'telling it like it is' but often ignoring key details that upsets their angry/negative vibes. Surely they can't be angry forever? Surely something positive happens and they can be happy about it right?

The moment they do make that video, they lose half their audience and a big whack of funding...
Sure. Why would it be a problem in either case?
The same thing can and will happen in any right/left argument. 

One side will pretend that voting for them is the smart thing to do. But won’t provide any real information. The other side will pretend voting against them is the racist thing to do. But won’t provide any real information.
Everyone is still looking for answers but honestly it is simply that. When people didn’t know what it was all about, they’d ask. 

No campaigners would tell them how it’s about taking their rights away
Yes campaigners would start calling them racist and saying it’s so obvious and you must be racist for asking

That is absolutely the reason the yes vote failed. No campaigners would answer, whether it was with facts or not, yes campaigners would abuse. 

And even today. If you ask or mention it, you’ll get abuse and called a racist. No one cares how you voted. They just care about the virtue signalling whether the virtue is “I’m smart so I voted no” or “I’m not a racist so I voted yes”

Both are nonsense. But it’s why the Yes vote failed.
Fair points but lots of issues are social and are posted on social media. I can of course allow a journalist who's no closer to the action than I am, inform me on what's happening or I can go to each echo chamber on the internet and come to my own conclusions, combine that with reading the article posted by the ABC for example and I have a much better idea of what's going on.
Why? If you think anyone is giving you the full story on the internet in 2024 you're the insane person.

In the same way you can read a Murdoch paper and have it champion the LNP on an issue and not inform you on another, you can then read the ABC and have it champion (on occasion, perhaps be kinder) the ALP on the same issue and ignore facts on the other..

Put those two articles together and you have a better idea about what's happening.

Why would the internet be any different?
But you’ve got to consider _both_ sides of the argument. Don’t you know that the people who think you should blow up movie theatres are just as extreme as the people who think you shouldn’t blow up movie theatres. You’ve got to come to the healthy moderate middle ground of light theatre explosions.
If it was just a mention in the preamble of the constitution then it would have past. But instead of an incremental win someone wanted everything at once.
I know why I’m being downvoted. People’s feelings are hurt when their stupid narratives are shown to be stupid.

You’ve managed a net positive though
Without misinformation, this comment could be context.
Without context, this comment is almost certainly misinformation
More like that it was irrelevant to the referendum whether Twitter existed or not in 1999, or now. If it were held today Australia would still reject a republic. Likewise with this one.

Morrisson, Dutton or Howard couldn't have killed reconciliation as thoroughly as Albo did. Not in their wildest dreams could they have got Albo (and Labor) to completely abandon the first thing he said in his election winning statement. That being implementing the Uluru statement in full - which included Marrakata and an eventual referendum on a Voice.
Fair point, I only considered it in being used in the scientific manner, not as a strategy for being obstinate.
That and celebrating lamingtons, biscuits and small animals.
>… and there was also one on the left, whose most famous face was Lidia Thorpe. While the Yes had one set of faces, one perspective, …

Check your facts.
Did they point out that the YES campaign also relied on systematic and strategic spread of unverified rumours and claims? In fact every bit of speculation about the effects of a policy EVER is unverified. The YES campaign literally admitted that the details of the Voice were not concrete yet.

The entire article is predicated on the assumption that YES was the correct answer, and that the NO vote subverted the true will of the Australian people. It's just more sulking by sore losers.
I'm not sure where you got your interpretation, even in the parts you even in the parts you bolded.

Seems like you have a pre-determined view on this and just made the above fit that viewpoint.
>… they can't keep blaming…

Who are “they”?
But for things like this a good journalist is not informing you what they thing, they are reporting NEWS. On subjects like this the ABC wasnt never telling X or Y, they were saying EXPERT Z (insert qualification here) said 'this' in response to what the story of the day was. Then go to somewhere like SKY and see their sources, dont weight up what the news are saying but where their sources are from. More often or not ABC will be quoting independant or university based sources and SKY will be paying for interviews, from someone trying to sell a book or who have made a questionable life by having opinions for clicks. 

No wonder the world is in dire trouble. 

Its not the ABC saying something, dont go to social media, go look that expert up, see what they said in its full context, not some stupid social media site endlessly whining that ABC keeps hurting their feelings.
I read all the news sources about something that interests me, there’s little, percentagewise, in the commentary that is of value.

Having said that, it’s worth emphasising the value of going across borders for the different news stories, to allow that much of the home brand has a marked parochial stance. And the difficulty of getting to the facts really came home to me e.g., when I followed the coverage of the Lucy Letby case

> Throughout the trial period, and much of the preceding six years when Cheshire police were investigating a cluster of baby deaths at the Countess of Chester (CoC) hospital and had arrested Letby, laws intended to ensure juries are not influenced by stories in the press meant British journalists reported only what was said in court.

>Outside court, however, there has been a growing chorus of voices raising questions about some of the key evidence presented in the trial.

https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/article/2024/jul/09/lucy-letby-evidence-experts-question

I avoid giving the current ongoing bloodbath in Gaza as one of the most appalling examples of how public opinion globally is manipulated.
With information, that comment couldn’t be out of context.
I didn't say anything about the referendum directly.

I don't understand why the person who was in favour of the voice referendum is more to blame than the one who campaigned against it for political purposes?
I'm happy to debate, in a respectful manor. Which facts do you feel are incorrect?
Because the yes campaign argument about failing always boiled down to being somebody else’s fault could never be that it was an idea that wasn’t supported
Yes voters who are unable to take the L
The author's previous publication analysing voice related twitter posts from earlier in 2023 ( https://osf.io/preprints/osf/qu2fb ), has many figures dedicated to a few examples of some from the twitter no side posting lies/conspiracies. (Despite the fact that at that point, the yes side was far more dominant in posting on twitter than the no side).
Chill lad, I merely used ABC as an example, along with Murdoch, demonstrating the opposite ends of the spectrum.. Obviously in this country they have the least outside influences. However, that's what journalists are supposed to do but depending on their interests or their publications interests there's a good chance they omit information or favour certain aspects of a story more.

It happens in every aspect of our lives. Scientific journals have studies funded by companies/industries. They omit data and draw conclusions that benefit their interests...

Even Albo right now is being soft on the gambling industry because he's scared of their reach and power. We all know how bad gambling is.

The gambling industry could have an expert say that gambling is great for the community etc etc. just because someone is an expert doesn't mean that they're being honest.

Go and look at how many doctors and researchers/scientists the tabacco companies had saying that smoking is absolutely fine and healthy. Plenty of experts have been wrong or have ulterior motives. Believing them blindly is just as wild.
> when *I* followed the coverage of the Lucy Letby case

> *I* avoid giving the current ongoing bloodbath in Gaza

Forgive me if I've misunderstood, but are you saying you wrote this article /u/B0ssc0?
Because it was politically naive and resulted in the practical outcome of forever shelving the thing he promised to implement. He obviously was never prepared to go down with the ship for his beliefs, merely to put indigenous people right over the cliff when it turned politically inconvenient. You can tell that because he doesn't need anything to implement Marrakata.

Furthermore it's the kind of thing you don't want in a political leader who is probably very likely to be wedged by the Teals to increase the GST after the next election.  They clearly will compromise on anything to keep themselves in power.
Lidia Thorpe wasn’t aligned with the Yes vote.
Pardon? Did you mean this for someone else?

Meanwhile, I asked who you meant by “they” - 

> … they can't keep blaming…

>Who are “they”?
Correction: that is your assumption about Albo, based on very little proof and the proof that is supplied comes from those who want or need to damage his party. Sure it could be in part true, but hate to break it to you, he may be the PM but that doesn’t mean he alone makes all decisions. 

Like your dig at academics, which ignores the whole point of peer reviewing studies. It’s funny how many of the ‘greatest’ and most ‘shocking’ findings come not from peer review docs but from those who bypass that system. Is peer review, flawless? No. But it certainly can weed a lot of the quacks out. Where as social media is all quacks!
Why are you misquoting me - you have some kind of agenda going on, e.g., harassing other users?
If it had bipartisan support and no massive campaign of misinformation against it there would have been much more chance of success.

But, I agree that the campaign was poorly argued and there were things that could have been done better. Although, I think you are displaying a clear bias, so I don't know if I agree with your overall argument.
On this one point, we are in complete agreement

"There was a No team on the right(as you mentioned) and there was also one on the left, whose most famous face was Lidia Thorpe. While the Yes had one set of faces, one perspective, No had at least two totally different teams/arguments."
They being the author of the article. Though it extends to other supporters of the voice that will latch onto this as "evidence" that the no side were bad.
> Why are you misquoting me

What do you mean misquoting? Do a Ctrl-F on the text I've quoted. It exists unaltered in your comment.

> you have some kind of agenda going on, e.g., harassing other users?

Have you perhaps confused me with someone else? I'm not sure what you're getting at.
You don't know that - it's just some kind of alternate history. If the republic had bipartisan support I think it probably would have been rejected also.. likewise this one.

To think otherwise actually leans into the idea that a small bunch of people determine the outcome of popular thought.. which is surely something you believe we had pre-elon twitter, right?

So given you've identified it - you tell me, what's my bias? Who did I vote for in the referendum and the last election.
By quoting part of a sentence without indicating omission, by adding emphasis without stating this is *your* emphasis you are misquoting me - I wrote 

> I avoid giving the current ongoing bloodbath in Gaza as one of the most appalling examples of how … etc

You wrote

> *I* avoid giving the current ongoing bloodbath in Gaza

Your other example likewise distorts the sense of what I actually wrote, which plainly states “…I read all…” etc. 

Your post is a wilful distortion.
You are soap boxing, my comment was regarding X as a platform. I don't care which way you voted.
I'm emphasising the part of your comment that's relevant to the question I'm asking. I'm enquiring about your use of the word "I" in the context quoted. My sincere apologies for thinking that you might be a journalist.
Well if you want to use the word bias, don't use it nebulously. Tell me exactly what bias you have identified.

I don't have to fit precisely into whatever box you've identified to put me in, so don't do it.
When you omit words from quotes please substitute ellipsis (…) to show that’s what you’ve done.

I’m still perplexed as to how anyone could construe ‘following coverage’ as writing the coverage.
