
To save clicks: former Ernst & Young auditor, policy director for the Menzies Institute, executive director of the Business Council of Australia, and current Liberal senator in NSW state parliament, Andrew Bragg, thinks Labor is doing it wrong...
I’m not sure why we would benefit foreign investors over Australian investors with tax breaks.  Interesting video.  Our government should definitely be building state housing appartments and townhouses.
It's just yet more privatisation of government services.
Straight up treason. This has no benefit to the Australian people.

There needs to be a Royal Commission into the entire real estate sector. Everything from this all the way down to individual agents who are driving price gouging because they can. 

I'm a home owner myself, but I feel for those who have good jobs and can't even afford a place to live.
Sure but it's mostly Dr Murray that I cared about. I get that Liberals are trying to spin this into political points, but this is what all politicans do in senate inquiries.
You mean the Dr Murray who is one of the biggest housing grifters on Twitter, always trying to sell his book, and also previously a candidate for the "sustainable australia party" (one nation light)
>  "sustainable australia party" (one nation light)

What are you basing the whole one nation light on?
Having read his book, he makes it pretty clear that a big Australia policy is fine and even desirable so long as the rate-per-year doesn't rapidly rise to disrupt the housing market as its a slow beast to adjust and absorb them. 

A stable high rate is more workable as investors know what to expect and purchase more rental properties to be built in advance as a result.
I'm guessing racist nutjobs but not at cooker levels that One Nation has?
How are they racist and nutjobs?   Or is this another "anyone who talks about reducing immigration is a racist" style link
Racist as in the textbook definition of "racism". I think most Australian's agree that immigration as a whole needs to be wound back.
> Racist as in the textbook definition of "racism". I think most Australian's agree that immigration as a whole needs to be wound back.

No one has actually come along with any links or anything to show it, just downvoted me.

I have heard this line about them a few times but never seen any actual evidence.
