
Good. Fuck em. 

I discovered when running late (of course) for an event in the Sydney CBD that a pre-booked space didn’t actually mean a pre-booked space. 

Tried really hard to avoid them ever since.
Secure Parking: I'm sorry, we have no parking available at the moment.

Drivers: I don't understand. I made a reservation. Do you have my reservation?

Secure Parking: Yes, we do. Unfortunately, we ran out of parking.

Drivers:  But the reservation keeps the parking free. That's why you have the reservation.

Secure Parking: I know why we have reservations.

Drivers: I don't think you do. You see, you know how to *take* the reservation, you just don't know how to *hold* the reservation. And that's really the most important part of the reservation: the holding. Anybody can just take them.
We’ve had the same issues with Wilson, pre-booked, turned up, no spaces left.
Selling a product that doesn’t exist? Did Alan Joyce get a gig there or something?
>Over the five-year period, more than 10 million bookings were made through the Secure-a-Spot system.

So, a $1 fine per instance. Fuck this unfettered capitalism.
Right,  now can we sort out the car rental places that rent you a certain type of car and then provide a completely different type of car when you arrive to pickup.  Oh sorry, that’s all we have.
If the punishment is a fine then it’s just a price of doing business

Start jailing these fuckers who treat the world like their private playground
This is just one of the dodgy things Secure Parking does. They also have locations where the access hours are purposefully not displayed well, resulting in people coming back to their cars to see the roller doors locked and have to pay an exorbitant fee to get out.

I’ve gone back to my car and used my wife’s 24 hour pass and seen line ups of people stuck that can’t get out so I’ve let them out so they don’t have to pay the fee.
lol. Wilson’s are still doing it. Reserved a spot in one of their airport parking lots and there wasn’t a single spot left in the building. Luckily the dude that worked there told me he’d sort it when someone left, and he did. But imagine being already late for an international flight with your family in tow and nowhere to park your car. 

Not using them again.
I've had my run in's with these pricks as well. I was legally parked on a public street and had some young POS run out of a booth and 'You can't park there, you have to park inside our carpark for $15 instead'. The prick had a towie on call as well. Good to see they have been punished in some way but they've been pulling this shit for decades. The fine needs to be a lot more!
What's with australia and giv8ng pocket change fines to companies who made hundreds of millions off the offence?
What’s even more fucked is you can’t access early bird parking anymore unless you pre-reserve a space that isn’t reserved.  The whole city parking is an unfettered fucked up rort.
Couldn’t have happened to a better bunch of cunts
So they are like Airline companies doing overbooking then. So far no issues with Wilson. Might have to stay away from Secure.
I’m so happy SA has a government run parking service, it’s really good with the plus card, which is free

Incase anyone is wondering, Upark plus gives capped fees, in Gawler place for instance, it’s $22 for 2-3 hours without the card, but it’s $17 for 2+ hours with it
Unless there is quite literally bollards protecting your spot or a separate section for bookings reservations mean squat in an otherwise entirely open to all car park.
As someone who has worked in the industry for a couple of years, all companies operate the same way (I worked for Wilson). Attendants in the car parks don't get any information about pre-bookings. So we'd have to constantly redirect people to nearby carparks
They FOOLED me, Jerry!
As I read this I started to read in Jerry Seinfelds voice
You know it really looked like you were having a real conversation over there!
*Waves arms around*
Clarke and Dawe script?
Wilson run the public parking at my office. They lease one floor but they gave in the past when busy opened the boom gates to permanently booked parking and let anyone park there. Nothing like going into work and finding someone in your spot, despite it being marked with the company name. 

They got hauled over the coals for that one
Wilson is one of the more evil companies in Australia. Like, their business model is to be assholes.
And how wealthy are they! The longer drivers get shafted by them, the more money they make
[deleted]
Going to be even better when they raise every parking spot's cost by $2 to cover that fine and a little something nice for the CEO
What about compensation for those that paid for a reserved spot but had to make alternatives arrangements?
Honestly, for corporations fines should be **double** the amount they have made from ripping off their customers - it's the only way to get them to take things seriously.
At that point, this is just the cost of doing business. Take a couple percentage points off the top and call the rest cream.
How about we just institute a corporate death penalty for that level of assholery? Nope, we aren’t fining you. We’re dissolving you. All your assets will be auctioned off to give the people you fucked over a payout. Any left over goes to a severance to employees who aren’t managers or above. Any monies left over will go to registered charities chosen by your victims.
Don’t rental places say “XX car or similar” rather than promising a specific model? At least in my experience that has been the case.
I got fucked around by this at LAX. Oh, you are a big family, all with suitcases, we can upgrade you for small price. Sure, it was decent deal. Cool, go out and pick any car in spaces 90-120.

Go out there. Only cars available are the ones we already booked. Fuckit, I've been awake for 20 hours, kids and wife are grumpy, we just got the original and left. They had a record of this as everyone gets screened at the manned exit gate.

Arrive back and return car, ask for refund. Oh no, we cannot do that here, you have to contact corporate. Also they charged us for fuel even though we topped it up. Luckily I was unfamiliar with the way the fuel payments work at the nearby servo (you pay like $100, pump your fuel and it refunds you the amount you don't use), so I took photos of the pump and the receipt.

Had to fuck around on email a bunch and eventually told them this was my last time contacted them and would initiate a bank chargeback if they didn't fix it. It got fixed. Fuckers.
No idea what company, but years ago I came back to a car park and the door was locked a few minutes early. I worked out that I could open the roller door (chain was padlocked in place) by rolling it a smidge, taking the chain off and moving it around the roller teeth a bit, then rolling a smidge more.
This is so wrong. Good on you.
At a certain point it becomes cheaper to buy a battery powered angle grinder and cut a hole in the door.
They tried their luck, and it was good.
No, Wilson is just as bad you've just got lucky. Definitely been in a wilsons carpark with a reservation and there was no spot.
That sounds more civilised.
yeah, but you have to go to Gawler... 

just kidding! I have some very good friends there that I hope to see soon. ;)
Then they shouldn't be offered as such, that's the issue here
That's what I thought was going to happen the first and last time I booked a space.

I expected there would be a separate area for pre reserved parking. Potentially separated by an additional boom gate like you see in some carparks that cater to residents as well. 

But nah, just a free for all.
They don’t even need that. Every car that comes in and out is recorded in numbers by the computer on the boom gate. 

All they needed was a program that states 20 spots already paid for in these times and basically take the count down 20 so they only let in cars to that count and not the 100%.

Then if the ending time comes but the car never arrived then they add the number back on to use - hey didn’t lose any money anyway because it’s prepaid. 

It’s quite a simple thing to put in place but they were hoping they could double dip, say person who prepaid ends up not coming in, they resell the space and get twice the price. 

They also worked on not everyone who turns up and finds no space will be bothered to follow up for a refund so again they double dip. 

So it has an easy way to do it but they were just greedy.
They fooled ME Jerry!
Seinfeld
Oh, someone wrote them a stern letter that they then had to pay someone to shred?
Mate 3 hours at a table is more than fair. Especially at a place you need to book a table.
Why would Secure Parking receiving a fine cause them to raise prices? Were they not trying to maximise profit beforehand and have just suddenly gotten greedy now that they have been fined?
Fine should be double the lost economic value to the customer. If an average customers time is worth $25 an hour and your screwing around cost on average a loss of your 30 minute per instance, across 10m events, that’s a $125 million fine.
They do.   But there is “similar model” and “not even in the same class”
Yeah but they don't even provide that - I always book a Camry (work policy) and I've been given everything from a Yaris (had to insist on something bigger) to a Carnival. It's like a lottery I swear
Gawler place is a parking garage at Rundle mall
I'm in agreement with you
> only let in cars to that count

It sounds like you're assuming once the carpark is full they stop letting people in, but it doesn't work that way. Most carparks aren't set up to reject somebody at the entry gate. So even if the computer knows the carpark is "full" it will let you in so you can do a loop and go out the exit.
Nah. My building has 5 different law firms in it. Building management were absolutely packing themselves because of it.
Yes they were trying to maximise profits before. Also they will maximise profits again by making sure that the fine is paid for by the consumer and not them...
People unironically blame greed for the inflation spike of the past few years like it was only invented in 2021.
That's a fair complaint. I guess I've just never run into that issue personally.
Yeah I booked a Mitsubishi Outlander and got an MG ZS
I've only ever been upgraded in that instance.
Sorry, read your comment wrong
It’s how the light comes up in the sign with ‘Full’, I have written the program for boom gate car parking in the past and yes they can make it not open if they wished - they just don’t.
But if they had the ability to raise prices without affecting the number of customers they had why wouldn’t they have done it earlier? How does a fine effect the price that customers are willing to pay?
By upgrade do you mean burns more fuel and I can’t park it anywhere because it’s fucking massive?
Sure, programming the gate to stop once full is easy, the problem is how people that can't go through the gate are supposed to get out and back on the road, especially if there's other cars behind them. In most of these places there just isn't enough space for a turnback loop, especially considering you would still need people with reservations to be able to drive up to the gate/machine to be let in.
Ok so they're just going to pay this fine without attempting to recoup the money? Haha ok.
Spot on.

My parents rented a small Toyota hybrid to drive around while visiting the UK. Easy to navigate small lanes and cheap to run. 

They place had run out when they came to collect the car, and "upgraded" them to a massive top of the line Range Rover. The damn thing couldn't even fit down lanes or in parking spaces, and it chewed through fuel. 

Alternatively I had also once rented just a simple family sedan to get around North Queensland when coming up to visit family. Car hire place had run out of that class of car and upgraded me to a "luxury" EV.

Imagine my surprise when attempting to drive hundreds of km's in rural Queensland with little to no public charging places. Also had never driven an EV before so was very unprepared on how to actually charge it, or what apps I needed to make it work with the chargers I did find.
The money has already been made. They were fined about $1 per infraction. Idk what the fee was, but I would be surprised if it was under $5. 

Lets say it was $5 for example (i don't park in the city so nfi the actual cost), that means they made $50mil for the cost of a $10mil fine. Walk out with $40mil profit. 

If it was $10, they still walked off with $90mil.

This is why banks and big business don't care about breaking the law. As long as the profit made from the scam is more than the fine, it is just the cost of doing business.
It's basic economics, if charging an extra $2 would earn them more money, they would have already done that. The company getting fined doesn't change supply, or the amount customers are willing to pay.
I agree that they made off like crooks, but they'll also continue to do so by having us cover that fine on top of it.

They're not going to see this as a $40mil profit for them, they're going to still see it as a $10mil loss which they will recoup.
They had an overflow of demand though for the finite mount they had od supply. They could charge more for the parks that they had but that still would have made less than if they just charged every person to book a park without even having to supply a park to all those people.

They did it this way to maximise their profits without having to actually meet the demand, they just charge everyone. Now because they can't just charge everyone, they will just increase the price for the allocated car spots, not charge for the excess demand and still be a positive outcome for them.

Will they continue to increase the prices now too because they have actually been told they can only charge for what they can supply? Absolutely.
The question you're not addressing is: if they can raise the price of parking now (to recoup the fine), why couldn't they raise the price before the fine?

If they were profit maximising, they should have been charging the maximum price possible before this right? Why does the fine mean they have the ability to charge more for the same service?
Correct, but that's adjusting the price to account for no longer being able to sell reserved spots that don't actually exist, not increasing the price to recoup the cost of the fine. 

My point was not that operating under new conditions won't affect the price of parking, but rather they would not increase the cost of parking to pay for a fine, if they were able to maximise profits by doing so, they would already be charging more.
They have the ability to charge whatever they want for the service. They could probably decide to charge $50 for a day in this car park that clearly has high demand as they wanted people to try and pre-book but they were still filled, even if currently they are charging $25.

My original comment was that they will raise the prices anyway to cover the fine so it actually doesn't affect their bottom line at all. They are not going to just cop a $10mil fine without recouping that in some way.
Maybe they won't raise all parking by $1 but in carparks where they have huge demand they could, they also could recoup in many ways such as staff cutbacks, etc.

I'm purely saying that this business is not going to just cop a $10mil fine and say "ah well".
