
God he was an absolutely useless opposition Leader. Made basically no impact or challange to the Labor Government.
Who?
So incompetence, rape or corruption?
Huh, I never knew who our opposition leader was
Oh no how sad... Meanwhile...
Maybe he can go to the second wedding now
HAHAHAHA
Is it South Australia or was it Western Australia whose Liberal party has been fully taken over by the religious nutters
Didn't even know his name. That's how much of an impact he made here.
He interpreted “opposition leader” to mean leading the opposition to the moderates in his own party and driving the various business groups and donors towards Labor.
I only knew due to 2 weddings he was planning to attend
South Australia Libs under Marshall had to remove membership for a whole bunch of Pentecostals that Alex Antic signed up, I believe:  [https://www.indaily.com.au/news/2021/06/04/the-divine-right-pentecostal-recruitment-drive-divides-sa-libs](https://www.indaily.com.au/news/2021/06/04/the-divine-right-pentecostal-recruitment-drive-divides-sa-libs)

Two notes about this: Alex Antic is a cancerous political operator who has look at the Trump-evangelical alliance in the US and thought such far-right politics would be great for Australia. He's also the recurring dipshit who tries bringing over conservative speakers like Trump JR. 

And Speirs can fuck right off, rancid little anti-abortion Christian wingnut. I'm no Malinauskas fanboy, but the Libs can stay in the wilderness until they get rid of these Trump wannabes.
In SA, that was very near to what occurred with the 'religious nutters' but then it's the Liberals. Obviously.

Sure, Labor has it's issues but the Libs are full of nutters aka Bible bashing, Trump wannabes atm. It's a mess. I don't know how Spiers lasted as long as he did, he's too gentlemanly. It was a poisoned chalice even before he touched it. This crap proves the point 'There needs to be a clear separation between church and state'. Let's get rid of the Alex Antics of this world from the political class. We need politicians who have some understanding of the struggles of the working people and that has NOTHING to do with the church state.

DUMP THE LIBS!!!
