
Not everywhere in this country is appropriate to take pampered pets. 

Imagine taking your pet to a remote area thinking there won't be any wildlife, it's their habitat after all.
What idiot lets their lap dog go out unattended in the remote outback?

It's up there with the morons that go to Frasier Island and let their toddlers and young kids wander around freely.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dingo_attack
30kg is a damned big dingo, especially if it was female. That's labrador-sized.

It's very sad for Gina, but could everyone please leave the dingoes alone. It's unfair to bring snacks onto their turf and not share.
Yep, it's the same idea as not letting dogs swim at the beach or in rivers in FNQ, because there's giant prehistoric water dinosaurs that will eat your dog for morning tea, who live there naturally. 

I think the relative lack of large terrestrial predators in Australia has skewed people's expectations, and if it's not dingos there still needs to be the same respect for snakes, large monitor lizards, coastal marine life, large birds like emus and powerful herbivores like kangaroos, as they are also all abundant in remote areas.
Exactly. I travelled through dingo-signed areas with two XL dogs, but I  kept them restrained. Not everyone realises though, it needs signage and reminders etc

It’s not just dingos, I’ve heard of toy breeds being taken by raptors, and not even far out in the outback.
Right? I have a dog that's a similar size and I couldn't imagine letting her out to wander through bushland unsupervised and *shutting the RV door behind her* (so the poor dog couldn't have gotten to safety even if it *had* noticed there were predators nearby). And the owner assumed this was fine because she hadn't seen any dingoes the night before?? Um...does she not realize dingoes are camouflaged and very hard to spot even when you're looking for them, and they also move around *a lot* at dawn/dusk so where they were 8 hours ago is gonna differ from where they are *now.* Crazy stuff all 'round. 
I worked at remote minesites around WA for a few years and at various times some of the locals were employed to help out with casual work. One leaseholder's wife was telling me about the problem with wild dogs out there... this must be about 17 years ago now, geez... she was saying the place was running with dogs and most weren't dingoes, they were domestic breeds that had gone feral (like cats) for whatever reason. Unlike dingoes, they can be large and pretty aggressive.. their problem back then was trying to get the state government to help with the cost of fencing to try and establish a safe zone for stationholders to operate within as pest free as they could. She was saying it was so bad running livestock just wasn't worth the hassle. That was between Leinster and Wiluna, to locate the drama.
Very true.
That's a really touchy subject apparently. You can shoot wild dogs, but you can't shoot dingoes, so people try to get animals classified according to whether they want to shoot them or not.
Yes - there was that rumour that it was actually a feral dog that took the chamberlain baby.
