No 
Fingers crossed for a Ramsay Bolton ending for this sick fuck
Oh fuck off, well done on "banning" an animal torturer and rapist from owning animals ever again. Now that it's illegal he definitely won't do it.
10 years is not enough. 
If it was 12mths for each animal that was brutalised and killed he would be in jail for well over 30 years.
Some of those animals were reluctantly surrended/sold to him, someone giving up their fur baby for whatever reason- believing that they would be looked after...
F@#K ME!!!
It should be a lot longer sentence for that many dogs, wasn't it like 42 that they know of...

Sick, he should have gotten a year for each dog. 

If you hit a dog with a car, it  would be a horrible tragedy and I don't know what the consequences would be, but not jail time.

However, lying to these previous owners, taking pics of the dogs before he did what he did to trick them into thinking they were okay and happy is so beyond evil I feel sick.

Bestiality on at least 42 dogs? Then torturing and killing them? Having a torture room? I'm sorry but he deserves a lot fucking worse than what he's got there.

I just feel so sorry for the owners who maybe gave their dogs up due to financial or work commitments and find out this happened to their dog.

The article I read said he even did this to puppies, like wtf.

Most dogs are so loving and trusting as well, I'm just heart broken for them. They're so innocent.

Hope he gets what's coming to him in prison, sure there's gotta be some dog lovers in there...
No chance of parole for 6 years. Lifetime ban on owning mammals. 
It just doesn't seem enough given the gravity of his crimes. 
[https://amp.abc.net.au/article/104194702](https://amp.abc.net.au/article/104194702)
He had child porn on his devices too. He should be locked up for life. He is a danger to society
Well I can’t help but think about how rapists of humans have received sentences of half that, but better than nothing I guess. :/ 

(PS if you don’t know the details of what he did and are curious, resist that urge and don’t Google.)
NOT FUCKING ENOUGH
So it's 10 years in an ordinary jail? And how tf will they be able to stop him getting his hands on animals when he gets out?? Good luck with that. I think his kind of depravity is hard-wired and will never be cured. He should spend a very long time in a forensic psychiatric facility. Hopefully, he'll get cancer and die there. People like him have forfeited their right to live in  a civilised society.
He should hang for this. Simple.
Sadly, I knew Adam Britton.  He used to frequent a green iguana discussion group I was a member of back in the early 2000's, and he even narrated an iguana video that I owned.  At first, when I read about this case, I couldn't believe it was the same person I'd known.  I am sickened and disappointed by today's news that he only got 10 years (which could end up being only 6).
[removed]
Thanks very much for allowing me to read that.

What a fucked day to have eyes.
No what?
[ Removed by Reddit ]
He should be banned from owning mammals completely. That should include owning his own body and instead retiring it and throwing it into a large fire pit.
What a disgrace he should get life.

He tortured and killed dogs for sexual gratification.

He's only going to do it again when he's released.

He'll fantasise about it for a decade, then commit his worst acts when released. 

I was banned last time I commented on this cunt for asking people to join me in delivering street justice if he's ever released.
He's a sadistic monster who should never taste freedom again, what a joke of a sentence.
I really hope that the other prisoners don't brutally beat him into a coma, crippling him for life. That would be a bad thing, which is why I hope it doesn't happen.
Take the piss
Jesus Christ, I’d put off reading about him until now. That’s fucked.
What a scumbag
His prison buddies wont take kindly to the nature of his crimes.
Can be out in 4 years with time served 😞
I'm generally a peace-loving and chill person, but I want this man to die a slow, painful horrific death.
He was also in possession of child abuse material - if he hadn’t been caught I’m sure he would have had a child in his ‘torture chamber’ before long 
He’s definitely someone who needs to be watched hence he gets out
Throw him to the crocs and let them fuck him up
What in the genuine fuck
He must die
I knew it'd be a pissweak sentence. My only hope is that he gets some just desserts while in gaol. Commit a disgusting, abhorrent crime and get a little slap on the wrist. Classic Australian 'justice'.
The guy should be made to make slow passionate love to a kitchen blender.
This is probably the worst crime i've ever heard of and i cannot believe how short the sentence is. Sets a horrible precedent. I hope this scumbag never finds another moment of peace
They always start with animals, and then they move to humans. This monster has no feelings. He needs to be locked for life.
DON’T READ THE COMMENTS UNLESS YOU WANT TO READ DETAILED DESCRIPTIONS OF ANIMAL TORTURE. Someone is posting graphic, blow by blow descriptions of what this guy did to the poor dogs that had been given to him by trusting owners who thought they were going to a good home. I can’t unsee it and can’t stop thinking about it and crying.
I'd just like to remind anyone who has connections inside the prison he ends up in, that I have 5 grand going for whoever removes both his eyes. No joke. Delivered straight to the person's family. Spread this to anyone who may be able to assist.
[deleted]
How the fuck did he only get 10 years?! There's no way after that time he won't get his hands on other poor animals. Infuriating.
Yet another complete success from the Australian injustice system.  System is working as intended
What about his possession of child porn?
I hope they fucking napalm him in jail, break his back and starve him.
Bring back the death penalty just for this cunt, into the woodchipper feet first and only a mm an hour.
He was sentenced today to 10 years but up for parole in 6. This guy will r*** another dog in his lifetime. Count on it.

Shame on you Justice Grant and Mary Chalmers. Hope you are proud of yourselves.
He won’t last long in prison.
I wouldn't have expected less than ten years in prison.  I hope the other prisoners get hold of that guy.  Apparently the sentence is backdated to 2022 as well.
Feed him to some hungry crocodiles and make sure to film it.
only 10 years? should be life
Anyone have the court transcripts?
I can’t read the details, can’t handle the images my mind will conjure up. I hope this fucker dies before he ever gets out and I hope it’s a painful death.
What an awful piece of shit. A bullet to the head should've been the only sentence.
Not even surprised.
People say “an animals life isn’t worth more than a humans”. Yes it fucking is, 100% in this case. I’m shown everyday more and more reasons to hate humans.
How on Earth is it only 10 years? Fuck this guy, he needs to rot away for life.
Hopefully the prosecutor appeals the sentence.
What a piece of shit.
Can't believe he'll likely be out of prison by 2028 🤢
Vile subhuman filth. Never thought I’d need therapy from a news article. My heart breaks for what those innocent animals went through. I hope he gets what he deserves which is more than his sentence.
https://www.change.org/p/justice-for-victims-of-adam-britton-rapist-torturer-murderer-of-pet-dogs
"I deeply regret the pain and trauma that I caused innocent families and consequently to my family, friends and members of the community affected," he wrote.


No word about the animals he tortured and killed.
He is British born..

So he probably has duel citizenship 

As soon as he can leave Australia he will 

And probably move somewhere noone has heard of him

Maybe Spain...Portugal.. 

And he will start doing this again to poor innocent animals..

If you can hurt..assult..torture kids or animals..

You are truly beyond evil and beyond any kind of redemption 

People like him cannot be fixed..

He should have been given life .

I found it so traumatising to read about the things he has done..

Absolutely vile..

I hope he doesnt make it out of jail alive.
He should be fed to one of his crocodiles.
I need to know that someone is going to kill him in prison! My mind will not rest until that has been taken care of.
The piece of shit has gotten off too easy. Absolutely appalling to be given such a short sentence.


Either the judge or the system is broken if he only gets 10 years
Light sentence, should be doubled. Hopefully they deport him back to the UK also
Wow
My very territorial dog would like a moment with this cunt.

Bring him round, I'll warm up my chainsaw, just in case the dog gets bored.
Kk l
He was sentenced today to 10 years but up for parole in 6. This guy will r*** another dog in his lifetime. Count on it.

Shame on you Justice Grant and Mary Chalmers. Hope you are proud of yourselves.
If we aren’t going to lock him up for life, we need an alternative for people who will clearly require supervision, something in between complete incarceration and complete freedom (I don’t think parole is enough). 

We’re going to lock this guy up, then let him out (certainly not cured), try to remove his outlet of animals, which leaves children (he already had child abuse material on his computer). If he has pent up urges and children are the most accessible…
There’s a chance he gets out, gets murdered by one of the former dog owners, and then that person will end up with a harsher sentence than he got in the first place
Can we start a petition to get him a longer sentence??
He needs to be locked up forever . He’s sick and twisted and not worth rehabilitation !!!!
It’s just absolutely horrendous. No words.

I heard about him in 2022 (when he was originally arrested) and I was like 😳! Then the suppression was lifted, and I knew of people that had been manipulated and deceived by him and handed over dogs. Because they HONESTLY had no idea. So I really believed “surely no one could be this bad”. So I watched a video. I lasted 10 - 12 seconds. It was AWFUL. If not, the worst thing I have EVER EVER seen.

I vomited for 2 days straight every time I even thought about it. It was like I couldn’t unsee it, and I couldn’t stop thinking about it.

In a way, I think everyone should know the facts like above. But it IS very full on and distressing.

And even today, 2 days later post sentencing, I keep thinking how on earth a judge of power can possibly think or imagine this man is capable of remorse or redemption? How could he possibly better himself from what he has done?

He is nothing but pure pure pure evil.

I despiiiiiiiiise him and what he has done.

He will get out in 4 years and do it all again the fucking filthy rancid evil things again.

He’ll be smarter and work harder at gaining pleasure from his sick depraved fucked mind - and he’ll know not to get caught.
Today there is something seriously defective in the judicial systems in many Western" countries.  They have developed a mortal fear of prosecuting and punishing serious violent thugs and criminals.   The are afraid to punish the very people who should never be free to attack, injure and even kill and should never be allowed access to the public again.  We can blame anyone who supports the woke and the enlightened approach to justice.  The judge in the britton case needs to be criticized, publicly censured and immediately removed.
What did he do to dog? Kill them or sexual stuff?
What happened? O.o..
It appears the judge left a zero from the end of that number...
Yet another complete success from the Australian injustice system.  System is working as intended
He was sentenced today to 10 years but up for parole in 6. This guy will r*** another dog in his lifetime. Count on it.

Shame on you Justice Grant and Mary Chalmers. Hope you are proud of yourselves.
[deleted]
A bloke walks into a Darwin pub. It’s empty save for the barman. The bloke sits down at the bar and orders a pint of lager.

As he pulls the pint, the barman says “Do you see that certificate up on the wall?”

“Yeah?”

“That’s my PhD in zoology from the University of Bristol. But do they call me ‘Adam Britton the zoologist’? No!

“And do you see that certificate of business registration hanging next to it?”

“Yeah?”

“That’s to certify the registration of Big Gecko, a consultancy I founded that specialises in crocodile management, education and training. But do they call me ‘Adam Britton the entrepreneur’? No!

“And do you see that video playing on the TV behind me?

“Yeah?”

“That’s a loop of my television appearances on *Animal Planet* and David Attenborough’s *Life* series, providing expert insight and commentary on the biology of crocodiles. But do they call me ‘Adam Britton the crocodile expert’? No!

The barman pauses a moment.

“But you fuck just dozens of dogs and puppies …”
Recently rewatched, appreciate this
Or Jeffery Dahmer ending too
Not even animals. Only mammals!
The reason that's there is so when he does get out, they can go on his property at any time to look for animals.
I'd absolutely love to work him over with a lump hammer
Huh easier to convict him next time because they just have to prove he HAS an animal. Makes sense if you use a braincell
They only banned him from owning “mammals” so he can still own reptiles. Way to look out for the guy. Sweet.
If a person tortures and/or kills a human or animal life without parole should be the minimum sentence - no exceptions.
9 puppies and their mum in one video. They were three weeks old. I came across the description here a while back. I didn't finish reading it but what I did read still keeps me awake some nights. 

I did see someone mention it was 19 months per dog but they must be being served somewhat concurrently. I'm hoping the judge's sentencing remarks will be published. Though I'm not sure I could face reading it..
Great minds....just read this post after my own comment
Unfortunately people like him get Protective custody.. but I am still hoping some guard that maybe got too much sun will accidently put him to the real guys.
> Lifetime ban on owning mammals.

Reptiles to Grant CJ: “Are we a joke to you?”
This guy is gonna have a great time in prison. I'm sure that other prisoners will take very kindly to a dog torturer.
There are limits to sentencing to prevent our justice system from degrading into a system based on retribution rather than rehabilitation. Yeah, sometimes it sucks, and sometimes there is a sense they definitely should have gone harder on them.
Is he not put on a list for the child abuse material he had possession of? Or is that not a thing in Australia?
Agreed, he admitted to being sadistic as a kid too. This man will find ways when he is out. People like him need to be gone out of society permanently. He'll bullshit some good behavior. All we can hope for is some inmates liking animals
Why would it be more? Animals are property in this country and every country besides, the fact we sometimes consider them as important or protected is just a fluke, in this case because the animals in question were dogs which people like and keep as pets. If he'd done all this with pigs probably no one would have sentenced him to 10 years.
He should be put in a cage in his torture room and filmed 24/7.
At least the USA takes child porn seriously. If that was here, he'd probably be getting 30 years to life. I thought Australia was a respectable county. One child porn video in his possession was a toddler being forced to perform bestiality.
The sentancing for rapists of humans is a joke too. That doesn't make the extremely lenient sentancing handed out here any better. This is 10 year sentance with possibility of parole after 6 with 2 years already served meaning he'll be out and all good to do it again in 4.

Plus this piece of filth also possessed extreme child abuse material so it's he's not just a danger to animals he's a very real danger to human children.
And avoid reading the article.

I could have lived my whole life without that knowledge. 

I’m gonna go hug my dog.
He will be up for parole in 6 and has already served over 1 year. This guy will r*** another dog in his lifetime. Count on it.

Shame on you Justice Grant and Mary Chalmers. Hope you are proud of yourselves.
It wasn't until I learned about people doing things like this that I began to believe that some people are truly evil and beyond rehabilitation. There can be no redemption when you have committed such atrocious acts that the average person couldn't dream of in their worst nightmares, and those people should be removed from society permanently. 
What was your impression of him through your interactions if I may ask ?
[removed]
Sorry, I don't even know where that 'no' came from. I don't usually post.
This whole situation is a big Nope for everyone normal tbh. I wish I hadn't become aware of it
Which prison? 🤔
🙋🏼‍♀️
I will join you. He would wish he wasn't released for the things I would do. it would make the crime rates drop at least 80%. This disgusting fuck did unspeakable things to PUPPIES!! Just read it and I regret it. I feel like throwing up, and my brain burns
do it. we support you 👏​
Yes for sure. I have also heard sometimes in prison people will get their face and genitals burnt off with boiling sugar water. That is another thing that could happen.
This may be the only hope of Justice I guess
I can't see any board paroling this scum early. I hope so, thre longer he's in prison the more chance for the other inmates to get to him.
Same here … this crime has totally broken me
It's way too long actually. Should have been 5 years or less for what amounts to a bunch of dog murders. Shelters do the same thing without the torturing part.
Thanks, I won't as there are some things best not knowing 
5 grand for another 5 years added to your own sentence... yeah nah.


But what if you happened to buy the Condensed milk from the canteen, and put it in a bowl in the microwave for 3 mins, then just happened to be walking past him when it spills onto him, preferably overhis groin.  

NT Jail napalm, and it's all an accident 😉
I’d be willing to contribute and the money sent to  the family , whoever tortures this pos
Yes I'm not surprised either. I'm just glad he's not getting out today with time served, which I half expected.
He was sentenced today to 10 years but up for parole in 6. This guy will r*** another dog in his lifetime. Count on it.

Shame on you Justice Grant and Mary Chalmers. Hope you are proud of yourselves.
The other prisoners will get to him before too long - he won't have a nice six years.  The guards won't like him either.

When I worked in the courts we had a case of a young guy who had sexually molested a little baby - a tiny baby girl only months old.

I don't think there is any end to the depths human beings can get to.
Let's fucking hope not.....hope it's f@#king long slow and AGONY
> Apparently the sentence is backdated to 2022 as well.

As is customary
Yeah that's pretty standard. Backdate the sentence to the date of the crimes

A few sentencing remarks are included in this article from NT News. I don't have a paid subscription so I've copied the text from a FB post
...........


Zoologist Adam Britton sentenced for
'remorseless killing', sexual torture of pet dogs
In sentencing, Chief Justice Michael Grant said he had 'no hesitation' in accepting prosecutors' submission that 39 of the offences fell 'within the worst category of offending of this type.

Reporter: Jason Walls
Date: 8 August 2024

Disgraced Darwin crocodile expert Adam Britton will spent at least six years behind bars for the “remorseless killing” and sexual torture of dozens of beloved pet dogs.

The 53-year-old was sentenced in the Supreme Court on Thursday to 10 years and five months in prison, with a non-parole period of six years, after pleading guilty to more than 60 separate offences.

A courtroom packed with animal activists wept and shook as Chief Justice Michael Grant outlined the “horrendous, depraved, brutal and callous” acts that constituted the 39 individual counts of sickening animal cruelty.

In sentencing, Chief Justice Grant said it was “difficult to conceive how any crime of this nature could be more serious”, saying “the suffering of these animals was indescribable”.

“On each occasion the violence inflicted on these animals was severe and usually prolonged, the content of the agreed facts and the descriptions I’ve given in these sentencing remarks illustrate that graphically,” he said.

“The sheer deviance and brutality of your conduct is not satisfactorily encompassed by the bare description that you killed each animal intending to cause its death - you conduct involved so much more than that.

“You used weapons extensively in the course of your activity - including knives, wooden clubs, pliers, bolt cutters, hacksaws and axes - as the Crown has submitted, the clear and unalloyed pleasure that you derived from inflicting this torture is sickeningly evident from the recorded material.

“In addition, your modus operandi was one of devious and careful premeditation and planning, the individuals from whom you procured these dogs thought they were going to a good home and that they would be protected.”

Chief Justice Grant said aside from the “high degree of callousness in the way you dealt with and then disposed of the animals”, Britton’s “motivations were of the basest and most perverse kind”.

“You took videos of the grotesque harm you were inflicting on these animals, you revisited those videos for your own sexual gratification and you shared them for the gratification of other deviants,” he said.

“The fact that you staged each of these remorseless killings as a production further reinforces the meticulous level of your planning.”

In finding the maximum penalty of two years in prison for each offence was “the only appropriate sentence”, Chief Justice Grant said the offending could “only be properly described as falling within the worst category of offending of this type”.

“It’s beyond and beside the point that it may be possible to conceive of an even worse instance of this type of offending, although in this particular case I am entirely unable to conceive of anything worse,” he said.

In also banning Britton from owning any mammal “for the term of his natural life”, Chief Justice Grant said he had “no doubt you would have continued with this conduct had you not been arrested by police”.

“I consider that as matters presently stand, you are likely to commit a further offence in respect of an animal and that risk will continue to present unless you are subjected to effective psychotherapy and antilibidinal treatment over an extended period,” he said.

“I’m less ready to accept that you are genuinely remorseful, that is particularly so having regard to the sheer delight you took in the torture of these animals and the persistence of your conduct in that respect.

“And what appears to be your continuing view that sexual interactions with animals short of sadism isn’t harmful.”
It won’t be available for about a month. I was there on Thursday, the content detailed was highly traumatic. Unless there’s a good reason the read it, I’d advise not to.
Yet people eat slaughtered animals every day. Always thought it was kinda weird so few people have much to say about that.
His 'apology' was a joke
I wouldn't convict if I were on that jury
Slow painful torture, killed them, & sexual stuff. Usually in that order.
He was raping dogs, I just read the article and honestly I feel sick to my stomach 

https://amp.abc.net.au/article/104194702
PLEASE delete this, people don't need to read it unexpectedly.
I was curious to know what he actually done and now I regret it I feel sick
The article you linked says this

>He has also been banned from purchasing animals and having them on his property.

But either way it's an incredibly stupid addendum. Tell someone committing horrific violent crimes that they aren't allowed to actually do that and they'll definitely stop right?
Mammals are animals.
It's worrying he could get the chance to start abusing animals again once he's out. Not easy to police 24/7, particularly in a large rural area I imagine. Perhaps not too difficult for this monster to find a discrete place to continue his horrific crimes. 
It's also concerning that he could also graduate to abuse of humans. Not unheard of for monsters like him, and child abuse images were also found in his possession. 
I wonder what his sentence would have been, had his victims had two legs instead of four? Part of me feels that such extreme, horrific, planned abuse of any innocent, defenceless living being should be severely punished regardless of species. 
The way he spoke about his crimes in the few messages he sent that have been published in articles was sickening,  I'm not at all convinced that somebody like him could ever feel remorse or be rehabilitated, or safely reintegrated into society. 

I don't state that lightly. 

In the past, as support staff on psych units, including forensic units, I've worked with a variety of offenders, with histories of physical or sexual abuse, volatile and violent behaviour.* 
I have also worked, on other wards, with survivors of such offences. Sat and listened to the shocking, heartbreaking, horrific experiences that violent offenders have put them through. Heard through them what some human monsters are capable of. I met some incredibly brave survivors, fighting to regain their mental health and rebuild their lives, whom I will never forget, and whose stories I will carry with me always. 
I also happen to count as longtime, close friends, one or two people who have served sentences for violent offences in their past, who have talked very openly with me about what they have done, even showing me court documents, and their files from prison. I, as a fairly petite and defenceless (these days) human, trust these friends, am comfortable alone in their presence, and have never been given reason to feel otherwise.
I explain all this at such length to show I have some understanding of violent offenders, from both offenders and their survivors, and that I don't believe that all such people are automatically irredeemable recidivists, "evil" people, or incapable of rehabilitation. 
Thinking back through all of the many offenders I have previously met or heard about, personally or professionally, there are perhaps one or two that I would be a little bit concerned about bumping into alone in public. 
Of them all, there has only been one individual who particularly sticks out as being utterly irredeemable, who I personally believe should be kept away from society permanently for the safety of others. 
I won't go into detail, but they too exhibited horrific, repeated, sexually violent behaviour to multiple vulnerable living beings over an extended period of time, and gained pleasure from their monstrous behaviour. 
I believe that, admittedly only from the thankfully scant descriptions of the crimes he committed, and the few messages he sent that were published, Adam Britton is unlikely to cease his abhorrent, criminal, inhuman behaviour following a 10 year (likely paroled after 6 years) sentence. 
How effective ongoing parole restrictions/supervision will be afterwards remains to be seen, but should he survive prison, I strongly suspect more living beings will be at risk from him, be they two or four-legged, furry, scaley or otherwise. 



*I feel I must point out here that the VAST majority of psychiatric patients/people with mental health issues are NOT violent or aggressive towards others in ANY way. Patients are far, far more likely to harm themselves than others. 
Psychiatric patients are often vulnerable to harm from others, generally far more likely to be on the receiving end of abuse, than to be abusers themselves. 
There are a TINY percentage that are dangerous to others on forensic wards, and even then, the majority of behaviour that causes staff to intervene/safely constrain a patient, is either self-directed/self-harming, or during psychotic episodes where the patient cannot control their behaviour/is not in control of their own mind.

/Step off my soapbox.
Are they really gonna do that tho? Are they gonna also search his hard drives for other grotesque material he may just be watching ans saving?
>Makes if you use a braincell

Why does there have to be a next time before they can properly punish someone for acts of pure evil?


How many innocent creatures does this psycho that clearly has no place in our society get to torture?


Help my apparent lack of braincells understand that?
God, wtf, he deserves everything he gets and more those poor poor babies. It's so beyond shocking that there are no words to even properly comprehend or convey how sick and disturbing this is.
Somebody in another thread said this cunt is so sick he would probably remove the fangs from a snake and use it as a fleshlight. Funny thing is I wouldn’t put it past him.
[removed]
I can see this going down like a shit sandwich in a UK nick
God willing we got enough in common with Aussies that he's going to get introduced to boiling hot water with sugar in it, or a toothbrush with two razor blades a quarter inch apart in the end, or just a decent size piece of sharpened steel or plastic
He’s in protective custody
Can someone please give me hope that he is going to get finished off in prison? I can’t sleep or function due to the distress after reading what he’s done. I’ve never felt so sick to my stomach before. Please just anyone with insight into how inmates work in general and what he can expect. Is there any chance we can do anything from the outside to make sure other inmates know. I would even donate money to know they kill him.
Evidently you haven't read or seen the details.
“The fact we consider them important or protected is just a fluke.”

What on earth do you even mean by that? 

A barely comprehensible post. About the only thing decipherable is that you appear to be defending an animal rapist. 

Strange take, to say the least.
This is deplorable and might be the worst take I have seen on reddit. 

Let me dumb it down for you:

R\*pe = bad, torture = bad, murder = bad, having a 'torture room' = bad, documenting/filming it = bad, encouraging others in a group chat to do the same thing = bad, telling people he will look after a family pet after they have to give them up, then doing the above = bad.

I hope you don't have pets, or children for that matter.
People are going to go in on you because they can’t differentiate a description of something from a defence of that thing, but what you said is accurate.
[deleted]
I just read a full description of the worst video. I have never wished violence upon anyone, but I don't think jail time alone could ever be enough punishment for this sub human monster.
Most people can't even stomach reading the details of what this man did, let alone doing it for sexual gratification. He had CSAM also. He's a lost cause and should be disposed of.
He was very knowledgeable and seemed to enjoy helping people take care of their animals.  I would have never in my wildest dreams thought he'd ever do anything like this.
[removed]
[removed]
no
I honestly thought you meant the sentence wasn't enough and I agreed, "no." Sure hope nothing terrible happens to this scumbag in prison. 
Yeah was wondering the same, gotta be Darwin Correctional?
'Prison napalm'... hot jam works a treat as well :)
If they cut his dick off he’ll be Little Britton
What the fuck dude?
Yeah ok mate. You sound really well adjusted. 
^ we may have found another one
Plenty of hardened criminals and guards in prison who love their pooches. He’s going to have to hang out in the pedo wing for his own protection.
It'd be worth jail time to dispose of a criminal like that......
Isn’t he in protective custody tho?
Yes so that reduces it even more.

  
I worked as a court reporter in the Supreme Court NSW years ago and saw some terrible people and some terrible prisoners.  I am sure the other prisoners will give this guy a very bad time and I wouldn't blame the prison officers for looking the other way.  I had to have an armed guard next to me in court all the time because the court reporter was situated next to the witness box and there had been cases overseas where the court reporter had been taken hostage.  Some of the guys next to me in the dock were so terrifying my hands used to sweat. 

The prison officers won't have any time for this guy either.
so if i committed a crime in 2021 and get sentenced tomorrow to 5 years, do i get out in 2029 or 2026?
Thank you for sharing this 😭

Do you know if the court transcript is available?
I can imagine. I don’t need to read all the details but want to view some parts of the transcript. Can you let me know when it’s released? I hope you’re okay.
"Blood is not on my hands" kinda of mentality when it comes to eating animals
If I'm honest I just don't really think about it much, understand that I'm a hypocrite and just kinda live with that.
Guarantee every person in here talking about how sick and depraved this man's actions are eats animal products on a daily basis.
Different animals, different emotional reactions.

Not everything is purely logical.
 Mate - they don't fuck 'em and torture them while filming before they butcher them... VAST difference.
Raping doesn't come close to describing it. But don't read into the details, just know its infinitely worse than anything you're imaging.
Much, much more than just raping them. It’s disgusting what he did.
And torturing and killing them
I just did exactly that and now I can’t stop crying.
I may be wrong but what I heard from people present in the court today was that it is mammals only. His defence argued that he should be allowed to continue his work with reptiles..
No doubt it will be confirmed soon.

Edit to add: yes, I agree it is ridiculous either way.
It makes it easier to charge him in future for recidivism; you only have to prove he has animals which is easier.
That is a complete misunderstanding of what's implied. If he can't own animals, he's going to be held accountable if animals are found on his property in the future (assuming he even lives long enough to get out of gaol). It's equivalent to restricting a child sex offender from being near schools.
Even more ridiculous because he never even “purchased” the dogs he killed, they were given to him out of desperation. And what’s to stop him from using some other property? Serioauly the only hope now is vigilante justice. I’m so upset
Out of curiosity, what do you think they should have done instead?
Yes. All mammals are animals. Not all animals are mammals.
Can someone read this to me
We have drone technology now and hopefully the victims who turned their dogs over to him can sue him for every last penny. The property will be gone at that point. 
They found videos of child abuse
You're going off on a tangent from what you actually said in the comment I replied too. Banning him from owning animals is a good thing
What is the alternative that you would prefer?

That they DON’T prohibit him from owning animals in the future? Perhaps you’d like him to be gifted with a puppy upon his release from prison?

He’s been sentenced to over 10 years in prison. It’s not as though he’s received just a slap on the wrist here. From his statement in court, you would hope that he’s going to willingly undergo counseling to help him control whatever these horrific urges of his are so that he doesn’t reoffend in the future.

I understand your level of outrage at his crimes, and can appreciate that you feel he should have received harsher punishment, but you’ve picked a very strange hill to die on here.
Get out of here, vegan!
Oh just reading an article now, he had the worst class of CP/indescent images of children on his phone.
Did you read about the crimes? It wouldn't be a stretch. Actually that's kind of mild.
One can only hope!
That’s a shame
Why the fuck is he in protective custody? Someone has to kill him.
Evidently you don't understand the comment you're replying to.
What details? This guy? yeah, I have and it made me sick. I have no idea how that's some kind of retort to what I said though, it's not like people would give a fuck if he was killing pigs (in the *correct, legally allowed* way of course, they might give a slight fuck if he did it another way)
OP is upset that the sentence is not greater. Unfortunately, the severity of the sentence is a reflection of our laws, which reflect how our society at large values animals.

This sentence that OP finds *not severe enough* is actually only as severe as it is because society does value the specific animals involved (dogs) more than others. If it was a different species (e.g. pigs) that we don't value as much, the sentence might be even less severe.

That's what they said. It is the opposite of a defence of Britton.
I don't agree with what they say, but it is true that we are far more disgusted by behaviour like this when it's targetted towards dogs than towards pigs. I absolutely believe that if the victims were pigs there would be less, but still a lot, of outrage. Ask people in this country what they think of eating dogs. Almost everyone will react in disgust. Ask them what they think about eating pigs. Almost everyone will have no problems. Why?
>A barely comprehensible post. About the only thing decipherable is that you appear to be defending an animal rapist.

>Strange take, to say the least.

It's hilarious that's what you got from my comment and then say that it's barely comprehensible. I think you barely comprehended it, actually.

What do I mean? Isn't it obvious? It's a fluke that some random species of animals have protections, due to evolutionary quirks which develop to bonds with humans (in some countries mind you) and some animals don't. Despite them potentially retaining other similar aspects like intelligence, one category is semi-protected, the other is barely or not protected.

Ya gettit now or am I still too incomprehensible?
OP says animal torture and rape = bad. 

Commenter says it's very very bad, and equally bad regardless of the animal. 

You say how dare you support torture and rape!?!

That dumb enough for you?
I'm still not even sure what they're talking about, I'm describing how animals are basically slaves in our society except for a treasured few pets which still don't really have many rights at the end of the day, and some people got big mad it seems. I'm not even trying to shame people for not being vegan or whatever, but it's the plain fucking fact that this is how our society works, anything contrary is just plain denial.
the fuck are you talking about?
The details of his crimes were read in court. How do you hear that and say “10 years is enough?”
I couldn't even get through a description of the worst video. I worked in a place where I was exposed to a lot of really, really awful shit and that video still tops my list of worst thing ever.
I thought the description of the animal abuse was not accessible for the public due to the severity of the abuse?
Thanks for the reply, that alone just makes it even more chilling that there didn't seem to be anything off about him from what you're recollection of him was.
no
Yes he's been there in protective custody
I'm sure somebody in prison got to him.  The prison guards were mostly great guys and you could see their contempt for him - so I'm sure they will look the other way with this animal torturer. We had guys from maximum security prisons in court and I've never before or since seen such terrifying human beings. You just knew they were capable of doing anything to another human being.
Well no, it doesn’t reduce the sentence itself.
Depends if you’ve been in a cell the whole time or in the community. Hence it being called time served. He’s already spent two years give or take in “prison”
I'm not sure what the process is to get them in the NT. I think usually you can buy them from the court but I haven't looked into it myself.
Thank you. You can email ntorders@epiqglobal.com and they will send you application form. There is a charge though and it’s not cheap.
I don’t think you’re alone my friend. Good to be self aware enough to acknowledge it though!
I know right, the hypocrisy on these cases always makes me feel sick
You know dairy cows are forcibly impregnated, right? That's literally sexual abuse.
I mean, they actually do lol
Huh… suspect you’re not up to speed with all the leaked abattoir footage then. Guess it’s more ethical to abuse animals when you’re killing them on an industrial scale?
I just can’t fathom how someone can be this depraved, honestly how the fuck can someone do these heinous things and sleep at night 🤮
I'm so sorry. If it isn't deleted soon I'll remove the whole post.
Ffs FFS 

F F S
So, there's this thing. Most judges are quite smart and they know the law. Most likely better than you. If he has another animal, he can hurt them. Without that additional rule you'd have to prove he hurts then. Now, if he is seen with an animal... he's in trouble.
And it only applies to the NT. Once he’s out, he can move interstate and go right back to getting dogs.
That’s crazy, reptiles are the sexiest of all!
That does make sense, and I don't truly know what the solution is. However it's an absolute tragedy that the punishment is a stopgap and basically just accepting he's going to hurt some creatures again, after which they might be able to serve a more adequate punishment.
How is that easier when he had been hiding this for over a decade.. how will he be monitored when he used the dark web and other sites to obtain these animals without “purchase?”
My question tho is how do they enforce that
In the NT only
Vigilante is the only way to stop a sick fuck like this. I support street justice for this crime 💯
I'd love to see him serving a life-time sentence and rotting in prison
I don't claim to have the answer here as I mentioned in another comment, but as an outsider without any experience in criminal prosecution I do feel as if his crimes warrant a much longer sentence without any chance of release before being cleared psychologically (I don't know if that's something they do automatically in cases like this).

I don't know if harsher sentences fixes the issue but it does personally feel that we have a different case of a violent male offender being given lenient sentencing every single week in Australia.
Chemical castration would have been a nice touch.
A much harsher sentence is warranted here I think.
This kind of cruelty to animals is unforgivable, but I agree that harsher prison conditions don't do much besides ... well here in the US, it just hauls in more profits for private prison industry. This dude is isn't going to get better, and anyone who treats animals that way is weird and IMHO dangerous to people as well. If someone snatched my dog & did that, I'd be the one in prison.
Chemical cosh? I don't know.
Yes. Life in prison is justified here.
The property has been up for sale for a few weeks now. Hopefully legal fees drain the proceeds and he's left with nothing.
I know
No, I'm asking you why that penalty has to exist when the alternative is an appropriate punishment rather than providing concessions in place for the high chance of repeat offending on such an unforgivable and abhorrent offence. 

You would understand what I asked if you used a braincell.
It’s a strange hill to die on to want him locked up for longer because monitoring a “lifetime ban” is difficult to enforce when he clearly used secretive and calculated methods to do what he did? The alternative people would prefer is prettysimple actually. 10 years is not long enough.
I do not believe that somebody this heinous can be rehabilitated. Why should the taxpayers pay for his therapy?
This was while he was on trial. I don’t know if that changed now that he’s been sentenced
It's possible I've misinterpreted, yes. 
My reading was: people only care because it happened to dogs and why care about animals at all - they're just property. 

My belief is he would have gotten the same sentence if he had done the same acts to pigs. Possibly slightly less but certainly not just a slap on the wrist. I think people would be equally outraged. It's not about the animal. Its about the depravity of the actual actions. 

'Why would it be more?' Because of the extent of the pain inflicted and the fact he has shown no desire to change. I'm not surprised that it wasn't more and I understand the issue is with the current laws.
Because he wasn't killing them in the same way you would legally kill a pig. I would hope that if he did the same things to pigs as he did to those dogs, people would be equally outraged. 
And to look at it the other way; I would be much less outraged if he had humanely killed a dog for the meat.
Anyone got a link to the details of his crimes?
guess what, someone reported me and reddit flagged me for violent speech lol
I’m sure that’s true. 

Adding to the abhorrence of this crime is the joy he seemed to take in knowing these animals had people who cared for them. Then there’s the fact that he’s a celebrity of sorts and allegedly an animal advocate. 

If this was some unknown guy in the outback fucking wild animals it would of course have been a different sentence. 

I don’t know if comparing edibility of these animals is important here. Fucking a dog is as sickening as fucking a pig. I don’t think anyone sane can differentiate in that regard.
> I don't agree with what they say

Yes you do. You just repeated their point in different words.

> but it is true that we are far more disgusted by behaviour like this when it's targetted towards dogs than towards pigs. I absolutely believe that if the victims were pigs there would be less, but still a lot, of outrage.

Is an exact paraphrasing of their point. How the fuck are people reading that comment as a defence of Britton. The comment is defending animals by pointing out the dissonance between how we value certain species.
Because bacon is fucking delicious!
he won't respond
A lot of people have such poor comprehension and are so quick to anger that they see someone describing the reasons for something they don't like as exactly the same as supporting/defending the thing they don't like.

It's shooting the messenger in its most idiotic form. 

>OP: "The sentence the guy got for raping and killing animals is too short"

>/u/-AdonaitheBestower- : "yes, but the sentence is a reflection of the laws we have around raping and killing animals, which are a reflection of how we view animals"

>random morons: "STOP DEFENDING ANIMAL RAPE AND MURDER"

They actually agree with you, they just can't comprehend your comment, because their brain is tuned to the "interpret everything I see as the worst possible meaning, even if I have to fabricate one, and overreact to it immediately" channel.

Mine was the first reply to your comment, when it had a single downvote, and the only replies since have been to do exactly the thing I said that people would do. It's like they interpreted my prediction as an instruction.
Yes…?
Thank you for wording it the way you did. It was reassuring
Yes - it just recognises the fact that he has been in custody from some date. If he’s been in remand most or all of that time, usually that’s less pleasant than long term prison.
ohh okay i misunderstood
How much is the charge on average?
Not your fault but I don’t think I’ll ever get that out of my head. The jury must be traumatised
> Most judges are quite smart

Oooh, yeah, ummm, I'm gonna have to go ahead and sort of disagree with you there.

 How often do we hear about woefully under sentenced stuff or a 13 year old let off from murder because he "didn't know it was morally wrong".
I bet he’ll start hurting/killing humans in the future. 
He’s banned from having them on his property too
They'll go to his house and check when they already go there for his parole checks
Throw in an hourly steel cap to the testicles and you’ve got yourself a deal!
Longer sentencing and shitty prison increase recidivism. Actually trying to rehabilitate people works best for reducing crime in the long run.


That being said there are always crimes that make you wonder if it's worth letting people back out into the world
There was mention of it in the sentencing remarks. From an article by NT News:  

“I consider that as matters presently stand, you are likely to commit a further offence in respect of an animal and that risk will continue to present unless you are subjected to effective psychotherapy and antilibidinal treatment over an extended period,” he said.
Good to hear!
Well if you just stated things explicitly such as "he should be in jail for life without parole" then I could specifically point out that that's longer than most human on human crimes. So yeah not gonna happen, so banning him from having animals in addition is good.
OK? What is the appropriate punishment? You are the expert here, clearly, so tell us all how this was supposed to go.

The guy is in prison for 10 years. This is at the higher end for crimes of this sort. The only alternative would be for the police to shoot him, so is that your suggestion?

When he is released - because our justice system is about punishment and rehabilitation, not retribution - he isn't allowed to own animals. This is an appropriate step. Unless you want the police to follow him around and shoot him every time he looks at an animal?

  
What is your brilliant idea of an appropriate punishment here?
Why is this being downvoted?
Completely agree.  He will never again get a job in his field.  He might never again get a job, period.  He will have to make money somehow.  He will go right back to what he did before, if not in Australia, in another country, with lax laws.  I don't think he can be rehabilitated because he is not sick.  He is simply evil, perverted.  Maybe he should be chemically castrated.
You did misinterpret, I’ll just paraphrase another of my comments:

You’re upset that the sentence is not greater. Their reply says that unfortunately, the severity of the sentence is a reflection of our laws, which reflect how (little) society at large values animals.

And that they believe the sentence is only as severe as it is because society does value dogs and pets more than others. If it was a different species (e.g. pigs) that we don't value as much, the sentence/reaction might be even less severe.

Read it again and see if you get that from it. Appreciate you being measured in your reaction to my comment.
I'd absolutely be equally outraged no matter what animal it was, unfortunately most people don't give a fuck, some fucked things already happen that people overlook. Either way I can't fathom how this guy will be out in 4 years
That's great, but if he was "killing them as you would legally kill a pig," guess what, he still goes to jail and people get massively outraged, so I don't see how that point can stand up to the comparison.
just read the news articles. dont know why youd want to know tho
I predicted people misreading what you wrote, but even this all surprised me. Understand it’s still just a handful of morons, don’t take it too seriously.
Ok, sure. I mostly said that because I probably would have been downvoted otherwise. I guess I was trying to express their comment in a more palatable way. People don't care about animals and don't want to hear anything that makes them question their actions. It's easy to be full of rage when it's pets that are being harmed though.
Sure, but plenty of people still choose not to eat it. Also, maybe dogs are delicious too?
It’s usually a cost per page, like $1 but don’t quote me on that. There was a morning session which adjourned and then continued for a couple of hours in the afternoon so it will be up there
About every time it happens because it's so remarkable. All of the judgements that are not, you don't hear about, even though in most countries they are all public. So yeah, most judgements/judges are sane and smart. If we're talking about US judges they are in some places elected which is retarded considering US election laws and campaign funding rules. But that means that if the judge gets to stay, the judgement was technically moral in their county.
He was already in possession of CSAM
What’s to stop him from using another property. There are so many loopholes in his sentencing.
how often is that tho
Sorry but this sicko is beyond rehabilitation. He wrote himself in his messages that he couldn’t stop and had no intentions of stopping
He raped a dog with a razor blade. He's 53 and has been doing this kind of thing since he was a kid. I think he's beyond rehabilitation.
If these were human on human crimes, he’d be called a serial killer. That POS should have gotten a much longer sentence. Hopefully, he’ll get “handled” while he is locked up and it’ll be over with.
“For crimes of this sort.” “Crimes of this sort” should have longer sentences to begin with. That’s their point.
No, as I [mentioned twice](https://www.reddit.com/r/australia/s/7GDWRdmWnb) I'm no expert on this. I just find it silly to ban someone from doing something after they commit a crime, outlawing an action is clearly not a deterrent.

I understand that it makes it easier to reprosecute but I find that absolutely tragic in the place of prevention. My idea of prevention is mentioned in that comment I linked but again I'm no expert.

But there's a difference between not an expert and "not having a braincell" so I went off hot at bloke because he came in that way.
Two reasons probably, because of the bitchy comment I made at the end which was a return serve.

And because they've misconstrued that I am against him not being allowed to own animals somehow.

Also who doesn't love to jump on a cheeky downvote pile on let's be real.
I see. Thanks for clarifying. 

I'll admit I'm having trouble articulating my feelings on this one. I'm upset that the sentence is not greater, yes. But I think I would be displeased with anything less than life in his case. Is that reasonable? Probably not. Is that realistic? Certainly not. 

As a whole, I'm thankful he's received a harsher sentence than other cases of animal cruelty previously have. It's progress. I'm content he isn't out today with time served.
Morbid curiosity i guess
[deleted]
Thank you so much for your help.
You could say this about anything. Suspending someone’s driver’s licence won’t prevent them from driving but you hope it’s a deterrent. They have to do something
Right?
I couldn't find anything concrete, as it seems to be case by case, and dependent on situation, but I think it's often weekly or more
>should have longer sentences to begin with

If you'd bothered to read the article before commenting, you'd know that the relevant sentencing law changed in 2022 so that these crimes *can* be sentenced more harshly, but Britton's offences predated that change and so the earlier sentencing law had to be applied. 

In any case, here's a tip. Whenever you next feel the sudden, uncontrollable urge to blurt out 'COURTS SHOULD BE TOUGHER ON CRIMINALS', just pause for a second - and try to consider that the people who determine sentencing rules are actually quite well-versed in these issues, and that whatever the sentencing rules are, there's likely a variety of good reasons for them being that way.
Slippery slope. There are limits on sentencing because we learned the hard way how poorly society works when there isn't.
A longer sentence is fine, but unless that sentence is life without parole (which it never would be), it’s still good to have a court order against him owning animals when he gets out. It makes no sense to criticise that element of it, it’s just another safeguard in addition to his prison sentence.
OK, so just drop the 'can't own animals' part, because that won't do anything. Extend the sentence beyond the maximum permitted by law, and add additional extrajudicial steps to his release, never mind the issues this will create with our justice system if it weren't challenged, or the likelihood that he could challenge it and possibly walk out on the whole charge.
I have a morbid sense of curiosity. I came across the details scrolling reddit. I read part of it. Worst decision I've ever made. Don't do it.
Oh, fuck off
consequences for exploiting loopholes for someone like this man are far more extreme than for things like suspended drivers licenses
what a way to spend those resources
if you'd bothered to use some critical thinking, you'd realize that even that increase isn't harsh enough. and it's unfair that he would still be penalized under the old laws given how extreme his crimes were
So society works better when some of the worst offenders are released into the public after a short time and given the chance to reoffend? Does society benefit from citizens seeing these lenient sentencings as a weak deterrent from pursuing whatever depravities they want to?
Exactly. This places further conditions on his release into the general public at a later date, conditions that justify his being monitored. You can't just lock people up forever just because you don't like them (even if they are raging scum the world would likely be better off without). Conditions like this give justification to keep the spotlight on the guy in the future.
How will they track that tho. Will he have guards watching him at every minute? And tracking his online behaviors? If so Why should resources be spent that way ?
That actually sounds like a more fitting punishment for lying, manipulating pet owners to sadistically torture and r*pe their dogs for over the span of a decade and making a routine out of it. And possession abuse materials with children and bestiality. I felt like you needed to be reminded of what we’re dealing with for a minute
Sounds good lets go with that.  Except obviously he shoulldnt be allowed animals even though we all know that wont stop him. Thanks for appointing me expert. I much prefer this to your suggestions of just having police shoot him. 

It's amazing what we can solve when we all argue in good faith rather than from a place of immediate hostility.
Ok it must be that bad then.
[deleted]
Driving dangerously could kill people though… and that wasn’t even my point
Eh, it's clear you have at best a surface level understanding of legal philosophy, so your opinion on what's unfair isn't all that valuable.
As opposed to permanently "dealing" with people you don't like? Yes. The alternate is the kind of "justice" you see with the likes of ISIS.
There is no middle ground on this. You either live in a rules based system or you don't.
I don’t think it really matters. The benefit of the order is that if he is ever accused or suspected of similar crimes again, the police just have to go by the house and see an animal, and he’s in breach of the sentence. Makes future action much easier. I don’t think it’s about enforcing the order itself.
I am not arguing the piece of shit wouldn't make the world a better place by not being in it. You try that though, and he walks absolutely free of consequence.


The legal system works the way it does for good reason. Changing that for this one stain isnt, and shouldn't, going to happen.
It isn't hostile to point out idiocy. You just let the guy walk on appeal, probably with a mistrial declared. Well done.

There was a resolution, it was the one handed down by the court. There was no other resolution on the table. You don't like the system? Take a look at the alternatives. Sure, no one is happy that this piece of filth will be allowed out of prison - but the laws are in place the way they are for very good reason.
You seem offended by me saying "Ok, sure", which was not intended to be offensive in any way.
