I usually say “no, sorry” then sometimes I get a “oh don’t be sorry!” or “no need to be sorry!”

I’m not really apologising of course, just trying to show respect. 

If I say “no thanks” then that, to me, doesn’t make much sense as they aren’t actually offering anything to me?

“Not today” well if not today, then when? Have you left your card in the car, you idiot?

“No” is a bit rude?

I am overthinking this aren’t I?


This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
>I am overthinking this aren’t I?

Yes
Yes, you are overthinking it but if simple "No" really is too blunt for you then use "No I don't" or even a lackadaisical "Nah".
No. “Why waste time say lot word when few word do trick?”
"No" is not rude at all
> I am overthinking this aren’t I?

Yup, you are.

"No". Or even just a shake of the head. They're only asking because their corporate overlords tell them to - they don't really give a shit one way or another.
>If I say “no thanks” then that, to me, doesn’t make much sense as they aren’t actually offering anything to me?

I always say "no thanks", which is short for "No I don't have one, and don't waste both of our time trying to get me to sign up for one, thanks"
If I have one I say Yes. If I don't I say No. 

Yes you're overthinking it.
Bro just say no
"No, don't have one"
Say 'nope'. The end.
Yes, because the woolies one in particular gives me extra cash to save up at Christmas :p
I just say 'No'. They don't take offence. They have to ask everyone, several times a day. Having worked in retail, and then as a volunteer in a Vinnie's, I had to ask everyone if they had a store card or Flybuys, etc. It's no issue if they don't have a card. 

What we find annoying are entitled customers who expect the world to stop spinning just for them because an item has sold out or a price change which is not a decision made by staff. It's not cards. Hon, you're good.
I say “yes” and scan it as here and there you get a $10 discount. I’m generally not for user tracking but when it comes to food/alcohol I don’t care.
I say yes, wrack up the points, then use the discounts at the bottle shop. Plus I have configured for electronic receipts and thus don’t get paper ones anymore. Cant see the issue.
"Not today" works with all those sorts of questions in my experience 👌
"No thanks" answers the question they are about to ask next. They'll get it.
>I am overthinking this aren’t I?

Yeah

Just "Nup" is fine
A simple no is fine. A 'no' doesn't need to come with an apology attached to be polite if the thing you're saying no to doesn't actually negatively impact the person you're talking to.
you most certainly are overthinking it :) Just say no.
Worst post here I’ve seen in a while.
Maybe get one. They don’t cost anything and you get bargains, albeit small, and rewards. Better than a hit in the belly with a wet haddock!
aw nah
"Nope" or "nup"
You must be having a bit of a quiet day to be contemplating all this.
Just a simple "yeah nah" will suffice.
All in the delivery. If you feel your tone is too blunt with just “no”, say “no, I don’t”
I say "sure don't" lead them on ;)
Na, 😅
Not every thought deserves its own post on Reddit
"No".

If I happen to have my wife's card on me, I answer "yes".
Sometimes people  say to me "have a nice day " and I feel that is too much pressure on me . What if I have a bad day  /s
I say ‘not today’. Vague enough to imply I *might* have a card, just cbf to use it. It stops them also asking if I want to sign up.
Pick one of these responses for next time:

"nope"

"yeah nah"

"not today"

"They say those loyalty cards are a gift, a way to save a few bucks on your groceries. But let me tell you, it's a Trojan horse. Once you swipe that plastic, you're handing over your life on a silver platter. They track every onion, every loaf of bread – building a dossier on your eating habits, your allergies maybe, what cuts deep if you run out of your favorite brand. And it doesn't stop there. They cross-reference this data with your bank statements, your social media – painting a picture of you so detailed, you wouldn't recognize yourself. It's not about discounts, folks. It's about control. They want to know your weaknesses, your desires, to manipulate you like puppets on a string. Wake up, sheeple! Next thing you know, they'll be dictating what you eat, what you buy, how you live."
I say...

No
No, I don’t.
If I can't be fucked- "no not today" yes- "sure right here" don't overthink things.
[deleted]
I usually ask them for theirs first tbh.
I'm not interested in having my information sold for your companies profit. Well I don't actually say that but it's what I think.
No, sorry
Could also go for a whimsical "Nope!".
Or a "yeah, nah" if it's a regional Woollies.
I mean, all our data is being leaked anyway, I might as well get something out of if
I've easily redeemed over $1k of either goods or money off grocery bills , just from swiping my phone (flybuys code in google wallet, or flybuys widget).   Partner has same code.  Also connected to online shop so literally zero effort after connecting it.

Already got my phone out & unlocked to tap & the code is right there.

Don't get me started on cash rewards
I don’t care if they know I buy nutrigrain and not cornflakes.
No need to be sorry!
Nope with a smile is both fun and decisive
[deleted]
Lol if you say so.   Looking at my history looks like between $10 - $20 off a month.  That's with almost zero effort instore, & zero effort online.    Probably visit the store every few days (live a few minutes walk from one) & online once or twice a month.
[deleted]
What card.  Reread my post.  Already got my phone out.  Practically zero effort.   

No ALDI anywhere near me so can't comment on them.  Enjoy your prangles I guess
