
Have they changed recently? Last time I tried them they tasted like depression in a box
I tried them based on a recommendation from Reddit and was horribly disappointed
Gotta love the 0.5 health star rating
"more intense flavour I find very addicting" 

Yes, that's almost the exact purpose of flavour enhancers
*addictive
Nice try Aldi.
Addictive is to addicting as supportive is to supporting.
In Australia, we say ADDICTIVE. Not “addicting” wtf
Bring back the Crimpy
But how is their Chicken Crimpy? That's the superior Shapes flavour for true connoisseurs of mass-produced baked savoury biscuits.
Strange furry mouthfeel when placed in mouth and then the texture is off when chewing.

Flavour and price is fine.
Addictive not addicting
There's no reason to pay full price for Shapes, they were $2 a couple weeks ago at Colesworth, just stock up and buy them the next special cycle.
Are they "jatz" style crunch, or fake crunch and soft like a "Ritz"? Fuck the flavour, the texture is the biggest issue with barbecue shapes nowadays.
Who pays full price for shapes?
Addictive. But yes, they look better, by far.
How could they be 2.31 cheaper? Shapes are literally 1.99 at Aldi
Aldi ones are too salty for me.
Only because shapes have gone shit !
They're also saltier tasting than BBQ shapes, and have more flavouring.  If BBQ shapes had the same amount of flavouring...like they used to back in the day...I remember the piles of red flavouring at the bottom of the packets, they would be nicer IMO
Man the reddit Aldi shilling needs to stop
Kids go wackos for snakos
Nice I'll try that! The amount of BBQ shapes flavouring has been on the decline for years. It's almost like roulette if you'll get a box with enough flavouring.
Flavour is good but I find they're so much more dry than shapes. You have to drink about a litre of fluid per handful of Snakos.
The whole point of Shapes is to transport you back to being a 12 year old watching cartoons at 4pm after school while you eat a box of Barbecue or Pizza Shapes with your sibling/s. 

Changing the flavour in any way just takes you further away from that - even if it is “better”
I don't overly rate the BBQ aldi shapes but their chicken crimpy flavour is a lot better than Shapes chicken crimpy in my opinion
I always find the "Aldi product is exactly the same asbrand name.  Same factory and recipe, just different packaging" vs "OMG the aldi version is so much better" confusing.  Both can't be true.   Someone is trying gaslight me to shop at Aldi!  Are they the same or better? (Or worse?)
Shapes on sale at Woolies are $2 a box and good quality. Just stock up when on sale.
I hope you understand the gravity of the situation calling something better than BBQ Shapes.

I will do my research this weekend but I'm pumped to give these a try.
Except I thought my daughter was asking for dog treats for school treats
Do dogs go wacko over them?
If only they did a Savoury flavour! :(
This is the most clearly corporate-ass post I've ever seen.
Super salty, but still better value overall.
Lol, looks like shapes in the 90s
Interesting. I think the pizza and barbecue ones suck by comparison but I’m perfectly happy with the cheese and chicken versions.  Still wouldn’t get the shapes version as who can spare the extra $$$ in these trying times.
Haha gotta add your own flavour powder now to Arnott’s biscuits—kinda bad economics to it so I rarely buy them but it’s the only way they’re enjoyable
Imo Aldi’s chicken snakos also taste WAY better than Shapes chicken crimpys, paired with an aldi French onion dip (also better than other supermarket French onion dips imo too!!!! Way creamier!!!)
Aldi’s just based
Love info like this! TY!
Cold Ones?
I tend to believe you as these are rare as rocking horse shit in any aldi I've been to. The other flavours are there, but this one... Nope
This is opinion, not proof.


I mean the price point and weight are proof of better value. 

But there is no "proof"in you saying it has intense flavour


If I find the flavour lacklustre and overly salty, that proof arnotrs are better?
Un-Australian behaviour in my opinion.
Salty suits my palate, I'll give these a try
This looks like the one shape that you hope you find in the whole box! That’s why I eat the whole box in one sitting… because they never have enough flavouring on them, you have to keep going to get that ‘flavour hit’.
Too salty for me
I've yet to try these, but I've tried:
 - the purple pizza flavour - pizza flavour not as intense as original Shapes. More like a subdued version.
 - orange chicken flavour - mostly very salty, not much chicken flavour.

Both also more dry compared to original Shapes.

Will definitely be trying the greens soon.

I also recommend Aldi's version of Tim Tams. They're just missing this unique taste, (kinda like a vanilla taste, not too sure what it is) that Tim Tams' original flavour has.
Should’ve started the statement with IMO,…
I tried and IMO they taste  chemically
Aldi snacks are the worst.
I can't get people go whacko for snakos out of .y head
And like everything Aldi contains palm oil - probably.
How similar is the seasoning?
I hate Shapes but I'll give these Snackos a go
Bro I work on Aldi store projects mainly electrical designs so I always get food from Aldi, yes there food slaps except some of the tuna they have really sucks but they do have tuna that is excellent
aldi savoury snacks are soooo stale in my opinion couldn’t pay me to eat them
They taste like paper
Do they have a pizza shapes equivalent?
0.5% health star rating :D.  That's amazing
The champion of shapes will always be the No Frills variety when it was still around.

It retired undefeated.
It is pity Aldi do not think Tasmania is worthy of their stores.
their damora vinegear crackers are also so so so addicting and flavoursome
Best stuff out there
Fuck NO
Agreed!
Addictive
Addictive! It’s fucking addictive!
Where’s this bullshit use of ‘addicting’ come from?
I have yet to find a shape that tastes like a BBQ...
"Did you at least grab the pizza Shapes?"

"Aw, yeah... sort of... pizza Snakos?"
Look at the fine print. They are probably made in the same factory
I love the good old snackos the cheese flavour is my personal favourite and my dog's favourite flavour as well unfortunately he always manages to get some out me
The pizza ones are fucking awful
Less ingredients too which is awesome. Why are you saying addicting instead of addictive lol
The Coles homebrand ones were unreal.  They stopped making them but for some reason continued the the chicken ones.

I won’t eat Arnott’s anymore because 2 specs of flavouring isnt my idea of a good time, and no Aldi down here means a Shapeless life.
I find that Snakos can be a tad too salty sometimes but yeah Shapes has become very hit or miss these days unfortunately
Nah, nothing beats real shapes
Yeah, I've looked at those at Aldi before and I probably bought them but I don't remember. I haven't done shopping for a while since I am temporarily living with my parents again.
I love snakos. The cheese ones are bliss
Agree! Love aldi snacks
Didn't know this was a thing. Thank you. Will purchase tomorrow
Pretty sure they might made by Arnotts
I eat just about anything, but these are bloody disgusting.
Eeew no they are disgusting. Taste like cardboard….actually tastes like the Arnotts crackers no one liked!! I will spend my $$ buying Arnotts shapes
Nice try Mr Damora
Yeah but the pizza shapes can't be beat and by far the best flavoured
The Aldi mint slice is wayyy better than the official
I like all of the Snackos better except the Pizza
Only half a star. Almost not considered as food.
I actually think the BBQ snackos are WAY too salty. And I love salty foods. I gave most of my last box to my kid because I couldn’t stomach them.
I like them too. Plus almost 1/2 price
These are all the same arguments for replacing heroin for Fentanyl
I don’t like them as much tho
You say you can stop at anytime but let's face it you're heading down the path of The Aldi Junkie and you'll end up on the footpath after a big day of looking through the middle isles for pepper grinders and tea towels covered in bits of liquorice allsort because THAT WAS ON SPECIAL AND I NEEDED IT - I can see the path you're headed. There's still time.
Nice try Aldi
Shapes are far superior
So you like cold ones too?
awwww Jackson nobody likes snackos!
Addictive
Common aldi win
Addicting?
The salt content was insane!
I'm sad they stopped making the cheese and bacon snakos. They were the best flavour. :(
I never seem to find these anywhere after I tried it once. But then I fell in love with Vegemite & cheese Shapes and I never looked back since. My other favourite from Aldi's Damora snacks are the cheese and salted butter twisty sticks.
LACHLAN!!!
I like shapes because of their hard, crunchy texture. These are more crumbly and biscuity. Kinda like comparing Jatz and Ritz.
Shapes texture is superior in my opinion.
Keen
I tried these because I thought they'd taste exactly like Shapes, only cheaper. But nah, the texture is different and the taste wasn't close. They weren't even nice. Maybe other flavours would be good but I don't know, I don't wanna find out now.
Looks like the 90s version
As long as the BBQ shapes have more tomato than parsley. I had a box and it was literally Parsley Shapes absolutely  revolting. I did complain to Arnotts and got two free boxes which by the way were still Parsley shapes!!
Judging by the health star rating a smacko might be better for you than a snacko.
i love aldi
Shapes are $2.80 at Coles. Are these 50 cents?
Nah the OG are the best. The Aldi cheddar shapes are the best.
I need to go to Aldi's!
Bring back Margarita pizza shapes!
Health rating not looking great
When did addicting become the norm instead of addictive? I’ve noticed it happening over the last, maybe, five years and would love to know whether there is a definite, intentional origin to this shift. Or an international peculiarity that has started to spread? Is it a YouTuber word? I don’t know! Would love to know more if anyone can shed any light.
xtra msg
The biscuit is too dry
“Awwwwwww LACHLAN!”
I agree! I love ‘em
I must try them as I've always looked and thought I bet they taste like cardboard.
More MSG fuiyoh!
Chicken Crimpy is where it's at and if you say otherwise you will be hearing from my solicitor.
Where are they made though?
The chicken crimpy ones are Sooo Much better than shapes. The other flavours I find very meh 😕
Yeah nope, they’re gross
the cheddar snakos are king
The cold ones did a video recently blind taste testing mostly alcohols and some foods against their aldi counterparts. Snakos were one of the products they tried and they all agreed they were better in every possible way. Worth a watch they're entertaining guys and I actually learnt something
Why is everyone saying 'addicting' all of a sudden? At 43yo, this word has suddenly replaced the word "addictive". I'd never heard "addicting" until a year ago.
Nope. Not true. They are not even close. Also, that's fucking sacrilege to even compare.
I’ve never had a knock off shapes that didn’t taste like ass
You lost me at the yank terminology.
Off to Aldi I go!
Damn you aldi, I know an advertisement when I see one
Nice try aldi marketing
Will give them a try, they definitely look like they have more seasoning.
"Did you at least get my Pizza Shapes?"
"Yeah... Pretty much... Pizza Snackos"
"Aaaaaaaaaargh, Lachlaaaaaan!"
They shit all over shapes.
I love these more than the ‘real’ thing
This is what Aldi do. I believe their ice cream is made by Bulla, same recipe just with more bits.
I once heard that every single Aldi food item is tested against its competitors, and it has to achieve a certain score before it will be approved for sale.
Hands down so good, nobody else I know likes them but who cares these slap 🔥🔥
Haven’t had them in a few years, grew up here on Aldi snacks. Had some chicken snackos the other day, completely disappointed in how much they have lowered the standard.
Inflation hits hard, but they have managed to keep the price low.
Yes but how's the all important texture?

Is it a buttery baked sorta thing? Or does it snap into shards like a jatz
I tried a box the other day and found them too salty. Had to throw it out.
Too salty for me
Burn the heathen
How do you get barbecue wrong though? I don't believe I've come across any knock off Shapes Barbecue that was any worse than half bad. 

Cheese and Bacon on the other hand can only ever be Shapes.
Snakos taste like dirt though, so...
Yeah but that’s like admitting you shop at Aldi 🤣
Shapes are also depression in a box. I’m always depressed every time I sit down and end up eating the whole box.
Remember when Shapes came up with the bright idea of New Shapes, everyone hated them, and they switched back to Classic Shapes? I reckon Snackos are New Shapes in a different box
Washed out carboard is the term that you are looking for!
The ALDI bbq ones are no good but the pizza ones hold up solid. A bit more denser then pizza shapes but the flavour’s spot on
My kids aren't that fussy. And as I shop mainly at aldi they tell me they taste like cardboard. So hopefully they have.
They went through a thing about a month or two ago where they were really crumbly. They're back to their excellent selves again now (I've gone through many boxes to test this theory).
Yeah OP out here thinking that More Intense flavors of shit means it’s better
‘Depression in a box’😭😭
Oof
Same. They are bad. 
Yeah I couldn’t finish a box. 

The Sodium on them is ridiculous 

That’s the ‘more intense flavour’ OP is talking about, I guess.
They need a junk food rating, just based on deliciousness, no one is eating these for nutrition
I imagine they're in the "savoury biscuit" category  which would also include things like unflavoured rice crackers.
But why would the original not do the same thing?
Is does say no MSG but it’s probably the salt lol
And thats the thing, " new food and taste" is what is chemically derived  and there's nothing natural about it. Food profits is about synthetic chemical food concoctions that avoids expensive real natural ingredients.  

They are doing everything to eliminate all natural ingredients and substitute them with a chemical brew. With the rise in manufactured meat products and it wont be long before KFC and McDonalds slowly start the switch "50% real beef" and next year it will be "25% real beef" until there is no real meat in any fast food products.

Its bad enough looking at baked products ingredients that was largely supposed to be basic flour and water. Bread is the next example. Most people today would not even enjoy real bread regardless of how good it is. They are so used to the chemical concoction bread.
Thank you. This is a hill I am willing to die on. When the heck did "addicting" become a thing
A whole generation raised on AddictingGames has had their English ruined. 

And I can’t blame them. I spent way too many hours playing Indestructo Tank.
Makes you want to strangle someone doesn't it...

I could care less anyway 😉
I'm sorry but can you explain your comment like I'm 5 please? I like to think I'm pretty good with words but I just don't get what you mean
Exactly. I cringe anytime I see the word "addicting". But to see it on this sub, of all places, is a crime.
Came here just to say this!
Snacko crimpy are actually a huge improvement over Shapes
Similar flavour, maybe slightly saltier.  But the cracker is much more crackery (crispier).  So if you like the doughiness of Shapes crimpy, stick with Shapes.  If you want something less doughy and more crispy.. try Snacko
I have to go with the Tomato Salsa from the 90's, but yeah second
I reckon they've changed something recently in OG crimpies and the ALDI ones are closer to the original
They’re definitely something I only get if they’re on special
Meaning Shapes are $4.30 at Colesworth
Given they used to be like $1.60 to me, that’s expensive. Better off waiting till shapes come on special and get a few boxes at 1.99
Exactly. No Amex? No delivery? No customer service? No corn flakes? No thank you!
Personally I think these are dog shit. 

On the other side you can get value pack size boxes of pizza shapes an its the shit
I swear its every second or third week (I work there)
These are dogshit imo
Don’t bother, I went as soon as I read the post and it was a huge failure. They’re not good. Get shapes
No, but some humans clearly do.
Tastes like sadness in a box.

You should feel bad.
My people!
If this had been about Coles or Woolies store brand the torches would be lit and this thread would be end to end condemnation and insults around corporate shilling.


It just goes to show how much good will advertising money in the right places can buy. Somehow Aldi, a multinational billion dollar company has managed to convince Australians that they're one of the little, local mom and pops that deserve our support over the Evil Duoply.
Flavour you an see
They had the Pizza ones when they should’ve had Barbecue
Well obviously I can’t show picture evidence of how something tastes.
Spot for you in South Carolina beauty pageant.
That’s when they’re on sale
there's none
Can your Shapes solicitor please bring back [Shapes: Tomato Salsa](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KM_c4wWnt3w)?
I am NOT eating MUNCHERS with SUNLIT!
This is why Clix and Topz are superior to Jatz.
Maybe you shouldn't be eating dirt with them, explains the dirt taste.
Coles and Woolies can shove it Aldi is the goat
I’m the only bloke I know who eats a whole box at once, it’s nice to see others share my famine mentality. (I could eat 6 boxes at once)
The amount of shame I experience when digging out those last delicious red sprinkles from the corner of the bag
Serving size: 1
lol that cracked me up
This event was as landmark as 'new coke' for me.
That move was likely intentional. All of the PR and subsequent excitement when they returned likely caused a great sales spike just like with the whole new Coke angle which, at the time, was an accidental consequence that sales spiked after they brought back classic Coke.
I think Shapes reverted back to the New Recipes on the sly anyway; they all taste inferior to how they used to be.
I liked the new BBQ but not at the expense of the old flavour. I think they made the new BBQ its own flavour but they must have discontinued it bc I haven’t seen it for years. :(

I am very glad to have my cheese and bacon shapes though. 
You will find a lot of stuff comes off the same production line at the same factory, just a different package.
The chicken crimpy equivalent is alright I think.

But yeah, unless the recipe changed I don't know what OP is on about.
Oooh, good to know! Thanks
Thank you for your service 🫡
The saltiest snack on the planet
So so so bad 🤢
Same. It tasted like salt on cardboard.
Yeah, shit just tastes like salt - not FLAVOUR
I said a wah wah wah wah wah
The categories for health stars really aren't that specific. This would fall under the 'foods' category. The six categories are:

1. Non-dairy beverages, jellies, and water-based ice confections
2. Milk and Dairy beverages (and alternatives)
3. Foods
4. Dairy foods (and alternatives)
5. Oils and Spreads
6. Cheese
Rice crackers aren’t even remotely healthy either though.
It’s cheaper not to do it
Fuck that - I want MSG, it is the king of flavour!
I believe "Flavour enhancer 635" is essentially a MSG substitute so technically they're not lying, but they've just replaced it with a slight variant that does the same thing - unami and moorish.
Msg better than salt tbh
I get that, no MSG doesn't equal no flavour enhancers though. It definitely had them in the past, does it list any under the ingredients?

I haven't had Snakos in years because they used to flare up my costochondritis but I'm interested to know if the ingredients have changed
It's getting to the point that before long, they will be selling dirt, flavored colored and textured to make it look edible. Of course they won't call it dirt, it will be something like Silicon-Compound 45, and the bastards will even market it as being non fattening
It’s an American thing. They don’t use -ive vs -ing distinction for adjective vs verbs.


I live in the states so have to hold my tongue when I hear these sorts of things. Don’t even get me started on how they call the main course ‘entre’. Bloody yanks.
I'm still battling "verse"...  in vain.
I'd just like to take this opportunity to whine about why Australia pronounces cache like cayshe and no one else does, thanks
I care a lot about “could care less”. I’ve tried caring less but can’t. 😡🤯
"he has been very supporting of this change"

That sentence is incorrect grammar, much like

"It is a very addicting substance"

In both cases, it should be the "ive" word, not the "ing" word
Agreed, I'll die on this hill.
They are more msg'ey. I like it alot.
They are halfprice like every 2nd or 3rd week and 2 for 6 often as well. There is almost always a deal with them
And when it’s not one, it’s the other. Colesworth alternate their sales so it’s easy to keep an eye out
I don't agree with your review, nor do I feel bad :)

That said, I only buy the cheese flavoured Snakos as I'm not a fan of BBQ flavour.
I was thinking the same thing. It’s so bizarre seeing how different the reaction is because it’s Aldi. It would make a great case study for what you can do with well allocated PR money, the image they projected fooled so many people.
Then why say "undeniable proof"?
no ADDED msg so they just put it all in before the deadline
Bro for the longest time I called them "Clitz" that's very awkward thing to be confident about mb

Don't ask your mother-in-law to "grab a Clitz for us would ya"
Nah bro, we're with you. 

Once you open the box, you either share them around or keep them to yourself, but one way or another the box is gonna be empty in a few minutes.
I've had to switch to the box with the 8 small packets in it. Wasteful with the plastic, but it stops you from smashing down a whole box.
Box of shapes is a snack
Who tf doesn't eat a whole box. This is the only sound method.
Nah I’m female and eat a whole box in one go, BBQ and pizza shapes are so damn addictive!!
Now u know another.
Is there even another way to eat them?! 
Always the whole box at once, that's why I'm obese
I feel like most people eat a whole box at a time, it's surprising you're the only one in your area that does it.
Im not much of a glutton (I can have a tim tam a week). But those bacon and cheese ones are brutally addictive. Havent eaten a pack in more than 2 sittings.
One serving =one box imo
Serving size 1 imo.
lol I do my husbands head in, I always eat the bag or box of everything and he just looks at me like I’m an animal!  Cheezels, salt and vinegar chips, bbq shapes, chicken in a biscuit!  I love it
Dude, that is a badge of honour, nothing to be ashamed of!
I will eat an entire box just for those delicious red sprinkles at the bottom.. my fingers be licked and digging to the bottom just for those damn goodness in sprinkle..
Fixed!! 💯
They haven't replaced salt with sugar again, so still the classic recipe

you've just got the rose tinted childhood nostalgia goggles on + boxes that have an extra 1/2 cup of flavour at the bottom of the packet are still a 1/50 chance haha
Single handedly raised Australia’s collective blood pressure.
Their Doritos taste like shit now too
As uncle Roger once said

MSG is salt on crack
Agreed, i see no msg and I'm like why it's so good
sodium glutamate vs sodium chloride
MSG needs salt, just less of it.
That is some Seppo bullshit
Personally I HATE the way they say groceries. 'Gro-sher-ies'!?!?! NO. It makes me cringe and want to regurgitate my organs I hate it so much!!!! Lol
My kids say "who are they versing?" and I realise I have failed as a father.
A verse is that thing that goes before the chorus.
What are you mean't to say instead of verse?
It is the correct way to pronounce cache
Yeah *no one else does*
Ok, thankyou, I understand now & feel a bit silly.
I'm with you that savoury is the 10/10, not to sound too snobbish but it feels like anyone who claims it has no flavour just has an absolutely blasted pallet or something. I know it's from the sesame but they genuinely taste like a hummus flavoured biscuit, it's great.
I only buy the fake chicken crimpy.

They're really intense lol
IT'S UNDENIABLE! DID YOU NOT READ THAT OP SAID THEY WERE ADDICTING!
Lol! My friend’s daughter asked me for a Cunty Milo. 

Since that moment, I have never called a Monte Carlo by its actual name.
This guy gets it!
With no less than 3 in the mouth at a time.
No it doesn’t. You think it’s going to but it doesn’t actually chieve that because they just get eaten over a few hours instead of five minutes.
The BBQ Shapes at some point 2 years ago became "Salt Shapes". 

Complacent in the absence of competition (no Aldi where I live).
Same here! Leaving shapes around me is dangerous !!
I’m a cunt too but it’s not from bbq shapes. It’s from all other the fucken shit I stuff down my cake hole.
I’ve finally found my community, the Mrs didn’t understand. You gotta finish it whilst it’s fresh
It's insanely good
Nah, something's definitely different. 

I remember pizza shapes had those little orange bits on them; they don't have them anymore so something feels off.

Cheddar shapes just taste of salt.
I don't know if I've tried the knockoff Doritos yet, but now I definitely won't lol
Uncle Roger: You know what MSG stand for? Make Shit Good. FUIYOH!
I'm going to try salting my crack next hit.
This wins the internet for me today!!! 😭😭🧂☣️
Could be no added msg. There could be msg in the shit they put into it.
That was a thing when I was a kid 30 years ago. Normally whilst playing Mortal Kombat
I feel your pain
Anything that's an actually correct term: play, battle, challenge, etc... there's a lot to choose from.
Don't feel silly - I'm sure there's other people here that appreciate you asking and also the other person responding
teacher here, and even I had to read it a few times over - don't fret
Savoury is a blank canvas, the other flavours are already painted. 

A blank canvas may look like shit, but you can make anything you want, if it’s painted then it looks better out the box.
Oooh, so *now* you're outting yourself as a Snakos connoisseur! :)
Hahah, that's brilliant!
Nah, 1 at a time, and flavour side down on the tongue.
When I was a boy I used to do this and create a “shape ball” lol same with skittles
Because of this post I bought some yesterday and ate the box :)
Same lol
Real Estate agent?
Exactly, the seasoning tastes like shit if it's left exposed for too long, gotta get em' while they're crisp!
The Aldi extreme cheese Doritos and their mild salsa in the jar is good. Hard to stop once you open them.
They are on the saltier side but still taste alright. They’re not world beating but good for 3 bucks for a decent sized bag
Why white people so scared of MSG?!
Read that in his voice lmao
This guy knows his Shapes.
Fair enough, but the same as with Shapes - I just only buy them on special for $2-3 anyway
A singular flawed case study that was piggy backed and sensationalised ad-nauseam by xenophobic media outlets and “journalists”.
My lips got tingly ewww it’s msg..
Yeah if you’re mad for your faves then any imitation one won’t cut it. The only thing i have that level of care about are M&Ms. I’m not cheating on them with Munchers no matter the case.
What a great sentence
Yeah, I think everyone has one snack they don't substitute out
