
Every single Aussie dashcam compilation makes me so very happy I learned enough defensive driving skills in my time. Avoided many close calls and a few would've been accidents.

Gotta say, one of the more frustrating things I see is drivers stuffing up in slow motion, just something about it really gets to me.
"Holy shiitake mushrooms" (24:55)
Mother fucking ute drivers are going to kill us all.
So many of these are just an innocent person being taken out by someone driving like a total fuckwit.
When 12:02 started I had the feeling I was about to witness something amazing and I wasn't disappointed.
Fair few hit and runs in this one!
What I see in a whole lot of these wrecks is impatience.
There is a species of the human race called "stupid imbeciles" it seems a lot of them drive cars.
Honestly, I think nearly every driver that shows up on these videos doing the wrong thing should be banned from driving for life. There are so many brain dead idiots out there doing stupid stuff on purpose because they think they can get away with it or it'll always be fine.

It boils my blood that these idiots don't likely get charges against them, or get slaps on the wrist because they need the car for work, so can keep driving when they should be suspended. They know the systems will protect them from major penalties, no charges, insurance costs not that much of a deterrence etc.

The only thing that would stop the morons driving like morons is jail.
I'm not an Aussie, but I've heard that in Aus, there are cameras everywhere and if something dangerous happens, everything will be captured on camera
The ones that annoy me a bit are the ones where someone isn’t at fault but could pretty easily have avoided the accident if they were just paying more attention. Like, yeah it sucks they pulled out in front of you but you had nobody around you and heaps of time to brake/avoid
The thing that gets me is the horn reaction time vs brake reaction times. yeah cool, a car just pulled out in front of you and stopped and your FIRST instinct is to HONK THEM??  
then you get  the half-hearted braking attempts on their 22" balloon mud terrain tyres that see 99.9% of their life on-road. Does my head in being on the road with these people.
Watch your profanity
Beginning of last week, heading home after work, I was sitting at some lights, a few cars down. Cars behind me, no where to go, brakes were on. Old mate Ute in front of me just starts rolling back (very gentle slope but still noticeable). I start beeping. He doesn't stop, I'm holding down the horn but nada, it only took like 2 or 3 seconds but by the time I realised he wasn't planning on putting his foot on the brake I had no time to reverse. His towbar penetrated my car's lower front grill and the tray scraped the bonnet. Thankfully the damage was minimal but still requiring parts to be replaced.

I got my car in July.
Whatever that guy took... he had way too much.
You're thinking of the UK
Australia isn't real. We're all actors paid to put on stupid accents. That's why there are cameras everywhere: we have to do so much filming to generate enough content to make the world believe we actually exist.
There are not cameras everywhere, except for everyone carrying one. 

There are lots of road cameras on intersections and stuff in cities, used for live traffic control.
Sometimes I don't think it's even to do with paying attention. Like some almost crash deliberately because they're "in the right" so decide not to take any defensive actions whatsover.
In this vid weren't there about 3 motorcyclists who failed to out brake a 4wd in front of them?

That's just piss poor attention - especially when you are the softest and squishiest thing on the road apart from cyclists.

I hope all my two wheeled friends are ok.
The amount of people that get into accidents and rage inducing scenarios all because they have an innate inability to arrive at their destination 1 second slower. To avoid most of the crazy scenarios all the dash cam driver has to do is ease off the accelerator. People get weird when they get behind a steering wheel.
Sometimes it’s better to crash e.g. if you take evasive action and hit a kerb and screw up your wheel or hit something else - chances are that’s gonna be on you. 

The person who almost hit you will piss off and you’ll be stuck with the repair bill.
Agreed. I always go through a two lane roundabout on the inside lane and just presume the outside lane is going to cut the line.
*profamity
I’d totally believe it
We always cringe when the footage starts and is of a motorbike. The risk of injury is just so much greater
Agreed but some have ages of room and don’t even slow down. They’re the ones I was talking about
