I booked a delivery in the 4-10pm slot today. About 6pm I was taking some garbage out & the coles truck is parked right outside my place. Not here for me though, had a delivery for next door. 

I guess they're returning with mine later or sending a different truck to the same place with mine? No wonder we're paying so much for food! (beyond the profiteering of course). 

Not the first time I've had this happen either, is actually a pretty common occurrence for them to be in the street a couple of hours before delivering to me. Happens a lot for them to be in the street multiple times a day, but can't be sure the delivery slots booked overlap in most cases, I know with mine they do though
Yeah, same happens near me. See the truck stop in the street and then 3-4 hours later you get yours.
They have two different delivery systems, Coles delivered and Partner delivered.
Every time I order from coles online I get missing food, just no veggies or no meat and no replacement and its always the main ingredients I want to use for dinner. So crap. Never again.
Not very efficient is it! I mean if people have booked different time slots, then sure, it makes sense, but when the truck is there within the timeslot I've booked, I don't understand why they're not making both deliveries at the same time.

Kinda glad I'm not the only one experiencing this, but also kinda wish it was an abnormality in my area and not happening everywhere
Partner is uber etc, not a coles truck, this is a coles truck each time

[https://www.coles.com.au/help/delivery/our-delivery-partners](https://www.coles.com.au/help/delivery/our-delivery-partners)
lol yeh I hate that! Worse imo is woolies, where you often can't order because it's "out of stock" & then it comes back in or says something like "2 items remaining" but in reality, the stock is not sitting there being counted, there is just as much chance it will be missed in the delivery as with coles. The "out of stock" always seems to coincide with when the item is on special & suddenly it becomes possible to order again as soon as the special ends!

& yeh, always seems to happen with 1 critical ingredient out of a planned meal, making all the rest of the fresh ingredients useless to have for me too! The size stuff is really frustrating too, woolies at least have an option to put notes, but stuff like broccoli, lettuce etc that's bought per each not weight, there's HUGE variations in amount sent, so can be not enough for the meal or way too much for it even when it wasn't missing per say

oh & if you tick the box to allow replacements it can result in interesting stuff. I got a cucumber because the parsley was out of stock one time! I've had a few good ones on that though too, such as little bag of broccoli & cauliflower tops out of stock, so I got a 1 or 2kg bag of mixed veggies that contained them plus a tonne more stuff & cost 4 times the price, but no extra cost to me. Those events are rare though compared to the dramas.

My health's not great though so really for me it's online or carers shopping for me & carers are generally even worse than online!
