How does this woman still have a job?
This headline is fucking excellent.
What I’d like to see is her investigated but not allowed to just bow out as all the politicians seem to do. Get someone to shadow her every move, uncover evidence of more corruption, and then charge her and lock her up. It’s bullshit that at the first sign of wrongdoing, people like Gladys Berejiklian leave their posts and get to keep their pensions, allowing whoever takes over to start a new grift. There needs to be some fucking accountability.
Too busy with the snout in the trough to watch the bodycam of the cop killing the old woman in the Zimmer frame
Can't believe how tone deaf Karen Webb is.
So how did she pay for the gin? It's not clear in the article.   
And she then gave them to ministers?   
Sounds very strange.
Whoops! Better ban this sick filth guys. I mean, after I got mine of course.
Still prefer her to Mick Fuller.
Ah yes, because it was the gifts that were the problem here. That settles it
From LECC 

Media Release - Operation Askern
Wednesday, 7 August 2024

On 27 September 2023 the LECC received an anonymous complaint in relation to the purchase of ‘Commissioner’s Gin’ and the failure by Commissioner Webb to declare a conflict of interest in respect to this purchase.

The Commission began an investigation into this complaint in October 2023, called Operation Askern. 

The Commission has now concluded that investigation and made the following findings:

1.         The Commission is of the view the evidence does not support a finding of serious misconduct against Commissioner Webb or any other Police Officer in relation to the purchase of the Commissioner’s Gin and presentation boxes.

2.         The Commission is satisfied that the purchase was in accordance with policies and procedures.

3.         The Commission found that Commissioner Webb should have disclosed her association with the supplier when she became aware of the purchase of Commissioner’s Gin.

4.         The Commission recommended that all NSWPF employees, including the Senior Executive and the Commissioner of Police are regularly reminded of their duty to declare any conflict of interest, including a perceived conflict of interest.

The Commission decided it was appropriate to set out the allegations, the investigation and its findings in a report made under s 135 of the Law Enforcement Conduct Commission Act 2016. On 6 August 2024 the report was provided to the Minister for Police and the Commissioner of Police as required by s 135 of the LECC Act.

The Commission’s report is subject to a non-publication order, except for the information contained in this media release.
Massive distraction... token gin gifts are whatever.

The contracting and outsourcing that gets passed off to consulting mates is millions of dollars for nothing. 

Just look at how many times the police keep hiring their friends to consult on procuring a new police system... only to abandon it and start over every 4 years
How many bottles of gin do you have in the garage Commissioner?

All stocked up?
What's to ban? There is already a ban on gifts worth more than $10. 

Unless you're a politician, of course.
The woman is a joke! Punt her!
I don’t know much about her but whenever I see her talking to the media she is made to look foolish.
I love how I still do not know if she is NSW top cop Karen, Webb or if she is NSW's top cop, Karen Webb.  

No need to tell me which is which... It is kuch better this way.
[deleted]
We’re officially part of South East Asia now
The Rum Rebellion part II.
To this day I still don't understand what made her qualified to be a police commissioner in the first place?

Judging from her work history, she barely has any real 'on-fields' experience, seems like a desk jockey her entire police career.

Maybe just ass kissing the right people?
Corruption? At the highest levels of power?!?
No!
Never!
I can't believe it!

In all seriousness, it's been happening long before we were all born, and will continue after we all have died.
The rich and powerful look out for themselves, always have, always will.
r/notthebetoota
Don’t forget the cushy job waiting for them as soon as they exit
Misconduct in public office is meant to be a criminal offence..then again, so is theft
[deleted]
Sorry we’re not worthy of accountability.
And in the press conference after one of her officers used his police issued gun to murder two innocent men she talked about seeing Taylor Swift the night before, when criticised about her actions she said “haters gunna hate”. She is a disgrace to the uniform
When has any top police officer or the police unions ever not been tone deaf ? "to serve and maintain the status quo from 1843"

I understand people knock US style policing for good reasons. However one thing is certain, that any face of corruption like a chief of a police force in the USA being corrupt he or she would be publicly humiliated and be forced to resign on TV within a day. 

The same goes for  police officers who   routinely  get dismissed by their chief that throws corrupt  police under  a bus on a live TV interview with no if's or but's. They then leave it to the corrupt police to protect any legal rights that they have in a court of law. Why cant it be like this  here?

Here its just press conference, a BS investigation to drag it out while sweeping it under the carpet. Police investigating police. There is no  real ethical standards or governance standards  in place to force someone like her to resign immediately. 

 Its rare for anyone here serving in the public sector to get instantly fired and especially in the police. People are entitled to due legal processes however due legal process and rights here essentially means "lets cover it up"  Even the police who stalk and perpetrate domestic violence using the assets of the police get hugs and say sorry treatment. 

It seems corruption here has shades of gray and tolerance. I am sure if they used police assets to help the Chinese government they would be gone, but if they bash their girlfriends while using police resources then its ok! Its never  about standards but entrenching bad governance and corruption that bends with the political winds. 

Anyway that you look at it, its not a good look and it  reflects how poor governance and ethical standards are here  in Australia.
She used taxpayers money.
There's a bar so low that Satan uses it for chin ups. 
[deleted]
Isn't the ban on *receiving* gifts? It's pretty common for visiting dignitaries (like an ambassador or a police chief from another country) to have gifts rained down on them wherever they go. She will have given one to every new police minister as part of the meet and greet. 

> The police minister, Yasmin Catley, earlier came to the commissioner’s defence, saying the expenses had been an established practice set by previous police chiefs as gifts to visiting dignitaries and for use at charity events.
> 
> “The commissioner ordered bottles of alcohol from the same supplier as the former commissioner did,” she told parliament during question time.
>
> “I’m sure all of us have given wine as a gift … it really does seem like quite an ordinary gift to give to me.”

The corruption investigation concluded there was nothing wrong with buying the alcohol or giving away the alcohol, just that she should have disclosed that she was friends with the owner.

I expect that she has banned gifts of alcohol mostly to avoid a repeat of what happened with the idiot MP who made the accusation in parliament that she had bought it to drink, which would have been much harder if she had given out commemorative pens. This is exactly the kind of boring bureaucratic rule change that you want to happen to avoid any appearance of impropriety.

It's a total non-story.
>The Commission is separate from and completely independent of the NSW Police Force and NSW Crime Commission.

[https://www.lecc.nsw.gov.au/about-us](https://www.lecc.nsw.gov.au/about-us)
dont get the joke is there alot of corruption?
What part of the independent investigation found that Webb did nothing wrong is giving you trouble? There is no corruption here, only a beat up by Webb's political enemies and their useful idiots.
Optus has entered the chat.
Every opportunity they get, they want a free lunch or want to thieve something from taxpayers. And we people like her and the politicians a great salary to uphold the pillars of democracy and the law. But no, time and time again they have to be petty thieves. Now we can understand why lower ranking offers act in a corrupt manner " look shes at the top and she does it as well"
Nobody stole anything. The independent investigation found that Webb acted in accordance with policies and procedures. Does nobody ever read the article before commenting?
Dont worry her 2IC will investigate. Police investigating police as usual, they just don't get it  and run it like a  mates club.

People like the Chinese Intelligence agents must rub their hands in glee about our politicians and public servants, "  dont worry we will buy and have them all in the bag by days end Sir"
It's the same old mind-over-matter situation - the people who matter don't mind, and the people who mind don't matter.
Ah. Baffing.
Webb did not "get caught". According to the independent investigation, she acted in accordance with policies and procedures. Have you ever considered reading the article before commenting?
Ah, fair. I'll take it back.
Love bells are ringing.
How does

>While the Lecc said it was satisfied that overall the purchase was in accordance with policies and procedures,

equate to theft?
>The Commission is separate from and completely independent of the NSW Police Force and NSW Crime Commission.

[https://www.lecc.nsw.gov.au/about-us](https://www.lecc.nsw.gov.au/about-us)
'we investigated ourselves and found no wrong doing'
>The Commission is separate from and completely independent of the NSW Police Force and NSW Crime Commission.

[https://www.lecc.nsw.gov.au/about-us](https://www.lecc.nsw.gov.au/about-us)
