Hey I'm hoping that there's some smokers and friends of smokers that might help me out with an economics project looking at how cigarette prices vary across Australia. 

How much is a typical pack of cigarettes in your suburb, town or city? How important is price when you're deciding what to buy? Do prices vary by small tobacconist v supermarket v other retailer?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Black market cigarettes are booming.
I go into a bunch of peoples houses for work. One thing I always notice are the duzzers. I don’t think I’ve seen a proper Australian spec pack for a few years now. 

They are all international dodgy imports or zip lock bags of chop chop (which sometimes come with Australian spec printing but on normal sandwich bags).
Prices vary by VERY LITTLE, because most of it is Excise.  


Under the counter Chop however...............
$13 a pack of 20...
Gov has taxes themselves out of the game...
$142 for a 50gm pouch of champion tobacco
In my area there have been so many small tobacconist pop up that sell overseas smokes for so much cheaper than Coles and Woolworths atm. Like a packet of 20 is $15 where from a supermarket or service station they are easily $35 - $40
Almost $70 for a 25 pack of Marlboro. 

My local tsg has untaxed Chinese cigarettes - just got to ask.
Australias legal cigarettes are the most expensive in the world. 
The government taxes them to the point that no one can afford them. 
That’s why, we have such a huge black market in Australia. 
On top of this, the Australian government banned vaping and made it prescription/pharmacy only except doctors and pharmacist don’t want anything to do with it. So it’s very very difficult for people to vape. The government wants people to go back to smoking because they want more money. However people just go back to the black market so the government still don’t win
I don't think I've seen another actually smoker pull out a regular pack of durries Ina couple years now. Only time I buy legit is if im caught short in the middle of nowhere.
My wife and I gave up six months ago due to cost. We were paying $35 - $40 for a pack of 25 and we smoked a pack a day. 

Sadly two of my kids are smokers and they pay $10 - $20 for a packet of dodgy smokes. Not sure how many are in each packet. That can't last for long because they'll be shut down when caught out.
Much cheaper here in the US 😉
Shhhh fuck sake
So are the shops that keep going up in smoke 💥🔥
why?
>$13 a pack of 20... Gov has taxes themselves out of the game

how?
Supermarkets and service stations are selling them legally with all the appropriate taxes paid, the small tobacconists aren't. Current tax rate is about $1.30 per stick.
I was blown away by how easy it is to buy dodgy cigs these days. Years ago whenever I tried to get anything sketchy there was a whole routine that I needed to do to prove that I wasn't a cop. This time I literally just went "far out they're expensive these days" and explained that it's been a while since I've smoked. He went "oh, we have another brand that's cheaper" and pulled them out from a drawer. 
They are 20's. Generally imported from the UK (mine are anyway). Been buying them for years now.
The secret ingredient is crime
People sneak them in from overseas countries like China and sell them under the counter for cheap
Yeah the tobacconist don't even sell the legit smokes with the right packets cause I don't think they even have a license to sell them but im not complaining. Paying $15 instead of $35+ is how it should be
