Nominate your neighbour, your car, the weather or your broken trampoline springs. Tell us about any non-political thing in your life that's shitty and have a vent.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Impatient drivers who weave in and out of lanes to save seconds getting to their destination.
neighbour is an absolute oxygen thief.    Many years ago we were spending weeks upon weeks in hospital when our 6mo had cancer and was recieving chemo (if you know, you know what that's like)

After a grueling two week stretch we came home and as we got out of the car  the neighbour bailed up my wife to complain about her ex-husband not doing something right (which was a common conversation for the previous 5 years)

17 years later (kid's alive) she is one of those classic people "everything she does it 100% fine, everything else other people do is wrong"
I don't know where to post this but I just need an outlet to vent:

I fucking hate Channel 9's style of reporting on a thing happening in past tense while the thing is just casually currently happening in the background.

They've used it so much this Olympics and I don't know what it is, it just comes across as douchey. Especially when they're all smug about it because they've correctly predicted what would happen. Stop talking and turn around and watch the thing happen!
The work security system, decided to throw an intrusion alert 2hrs before open this morning. Got in to discover nothing wrong.
Every time that you use self service checkout at Cole etc, they not only can do facial recognition but they tape you to make sure you haven't stolen anything.
I was watching the latest Dash Cams Australia  crash compilation and it was so hard to watch. So much trauma, even from minor accidents, caused by reckless idiots. Fuckwitts, the lot of them.
> everything she does it 100% fine, everything else other people do is wrong

Sounds like reddit IRL. 

Maybe even a mod.
Indeed.  I hate it when good people come hat in hand looking for help on a question about (whatever topic) and someone cuts them down for 'stupid question'  I'm getting that on a forum right now.  

My line - Your post count does not equal knowledge
