I swear I heard the commentator (don't know his name) say "and it's the spearchuckers coming up" as Javelin was close to starting.

He had an awkward pause after he said it too haha...
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
My daughter has been into the games and we’ve worked out if you watch via the app, selecting the specific sport, you get much better commentary or none at all, and way less ads.
After we won the dudes skate park gold, Eddie Maguire said "That was SICK."

Please...shut the fuck up, Eddie.
Don't tell me they've brought Langer and Hayden in to call the athletics!
I mean… on one hand that’s obviously what javelin is. On the other…
I definitely heard it on the Stan commentary and did a little double-take.
Channel 9 have totally fucked up the Olympics, might as well change Olympics to Golf tournament with some other sports.
Reminds me of a lady I heard the other day. She called a roundabout a “traffic circle”.
Mostly deadpan commentary with the commentators mumbling names that they aren’t confident pronouncing.

Which is fine, for the most part commentary is unnecessary.
That’s the world feed. Often the commentators are Australian as our broadcaster contract changed and Ch7 crew were available.
People whinge no matter what.  In the skateboard gold medal thread people were complaining about the commentary which was 2 passionate Aussie skateboarders who actually knew the tricks and called it with such enthusiasm.  Choose experts in the field without the TV expert experience and people complain, pull a TV commentary expert who isn't an expert on that sport and people complain.

Not saying you are wrong about Eddie, just saying they can't win as people whinge either way
That was after he’d interviewed the winner and they’d had a laugh about their differing lingo. Eddie sucks, but that wasn’t as cringy with context. 
STFU Eddie applies year round not just the Olympics.
Well they had Tubby Taylor calling the platform diving the other night, wouldn't surprise me.
Traffic Circle is a legitimate term for a traffic management feature similar to a roundabot
rotary intersection
It’s vastly superior, the commentators don’t feel the need to fill every moment with inane chatter or shriek and carry on every time an Aussie farts.
He must've pulled it out more than once then lol. I heard it directly after the results and it was just between him and the skate commentators.
He's nailed that!
36 years on this planet and I’ve never heard it! Might have to start using it.
> every time an Aussie farts

It mildly irritates me when the commentators give unequal treatment to competitors from different countries when they have a bad run.

Especially in the diving. Eg. Other country's competitor has a bad dive "ah thats a shame".... Aussie has an equally bad dive (with a similar score) "pretty good dive that one!".

It's not even tubby Taylor really doing it, it's the other bloke.
Something I can’t stand on the tv broadcast is when the commentator calls it like a radio broadcast.
This sums up AFL commentary. Is the constant chatter an Aussie thing perhaps? Awful.
Wait'll you hear about Rotaries...

(At least in US/Can terms, traffic circles and roundabouts and rotaries are all slightly different things. The funny bit is that the cities/states/provinces don't all agree which is which...)
For most of the ones doing sports commentary in this country either started in radio of some sort or have some radio gig normally anyway
My brain cant handle this info
