I often hear this term in conversation or see it in Australian subs. 

It’s usually delivered in the context of a mild insult, as in: “dunno if I would do like Old Mate suggested”. 

The term is newish I guess. I haven’t heard it used before 2020. 

But it just makes me think of a farmer in an Akubra saying: “I warned Old Mate not to drive down that road, now he’s bogged.”

So unless you are a farmer, please stop using the term Old Mate, or I will not upvote your comment. 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Old Mate thinks this is a new term and only for farmers. What a wanker.
How’s Old Mate professing his/her ignorance and, in the very same breath, demanding that everyone stop using a term which has been in circulation since time immemorial 
Oh no! Ol' mate won't upvote my comments!
Look at old mate over here, getting his knickers in a twist over a simple phrase.
You hadn’t heard it used before 2020?!! How old are you?
Ol' Mate has been around for a lot longer than 2020 mate, and is often used by way more than just farmers. It doesn't have to be an insult - I've only ever seen it used in the context of "that person who it is immediately obvious I am talking about".
I grew up in central Queensland and it's been a thing my whole life, so it's been around since the 1990s at least.
Old Mate OP actually sounds more like Your Mate
It’s great when referring to a mutual friend or somebody that supplies something to you thats illegal so you’re not name dropping them and breaking the street code. Lmao
I first heard it in an office setting in Sydney in the mid-90s.
Its been around for donkeys and it's contextual. Doesn't have to be an insult, can also be endearment or just a substitute for someone's name if you don't know it.
OP took one step outside a city for the first time in his life and is now hearing what most regional people speak like and thinks its an insult. Dont step foot inside a country pub there fella...you'll feint
Good Lord. Are you kidding me?
It's not a "horrible phrase", and it's certainly not "new". It's VERY contextual - the same as some of us use bastard - and some use cunt. I've been hearing it for at least 50 years - certainly in common use much longer than cunt being anything other than the most forbidden of swearing 

"Well looky there, it's me old mate, Wally" is a phrase I've genuinely used when meeting somebody I hadn't seen for a while, in an unexpected situation. 

It can be used in a derisive manner - but that isn't the phrase itself - it's to do with intent and context
Old mates running a downvote speedrun
Old Mate's out here with a post history like that, drawing attention to himself?

Yikes.
Can be a mild insult, or neutral, or friendly.

I've seen it for about 15 years, more in the last 5.

I've never heard a farmer use it, because I don't know any farmers.

Old Mate needs to chill.
Am a woman, not raised in the country/ farming (?) and I first used it early high school probably 25 years ago? Can be an insult or a compliment! (“Your mate” is always an insult)
2020. Surely this is a fake troll post?
No need to be worried about being called Old Mate. You're the type of guy people call 'Your Mate'.
Old mate gatekeeping the use of words.
Old mate with delusions of grandeur and the misconception his thoughts on the matter, matter.
Check out old mate showing his whole ass in public like this. I’d be so embarrassed. Imagine!
"Old Mate" has been around for as long as I can recall (4+ decades) and one of my favourite expressions, especially when talking about an idiot or a person we don't like. I use it regularly and won't stop anytime soon, despite your disdain OP.
Oh no. Old mate isn’t going to upvote me? What ever will I do without one wankers upvote?
Old mate thinks he can tell me when to say old mate.
Old mate is what your mum calls your father because she doesn't know, or can't remember his name.  

Yeah, it's been around way before you were born old mate.
Is this a shitpost
Fuckn’ old mate over ‘ere
I've been hearing it for at least 20 years now.
Take a chill pill old mate.
No
Come on old mate, it's been in the common vernacular for a long time, just because you lived under a rock until 2020 doesn't mean the term old mate didn't exist until then... old mate.
My kids used to call their Grandmother's boyfriend Old Mate back in the early 2000's.

If old mate thinks its only been around since 2020 i would suggest he is either only 5 or a new immigrant ?

I'm 50+ and have heard the term most of this old mate's life !
Is there a geographic element to this phrase? I never heard it growing up (WA), and only came across it on reddit in the last few years.
Trove has records of "old mate" being used well over 100 years ago in newspapers all over Australia.


Not that this is the origin, Trove is just a simple and amazing resource for looking at Australian history.



https://trove.nla.gov.au/search/advanced/category/newspapers?keyword.phrase=%22old%20mate%22&startPos=20
Old mate is over 30 and has only just heard of old mate

also fuck off gronk, you spell bickie "bikky"
Have you being living under a rock or are you just 11?
I’ve figured it out. I went to school with a bloke that everyone called Old Mate, never actually found out his real name. It wasn’t derogatory, he was just Old Mate. I can’t imagine that he liked it though. Much like OP. Wait - he is OP! Come to the interwebs to finally let it all out. Purge away! 
Have you considered the term “Old Cunt” instead?
Does Old Mate also like his/her lattes extra milky and the cycling spandex extra tight? Gatekeeping time-honoured vernacular via threats of withholding that sweet, sweet upvotes - boldest post I've seen in a long time! On ya, Old Mate.
Old mate thinking it's a term of endearment.
Old mate wandered outside the CBD for the first time.
When the year 7 thinks they know everything
And doesn't seem to actually know how it is used either. At least the thread is properly schooling Old Mate.
I love the term “knickers in a twist”!

But I can’t upvote you ‘cos you said “old mate”. Sorry cob’
4
I’m just assuming that they’ve never met anybody who could stand to be around them for longer than an inner city circlejerk.
>I've only ever seen it used in the context of "that person who it is immediately obvious I am talking about".

This. I've never heard it used as an insult, just a way of saying that bloke who i've forgotten his name
Pretty sure there were references to it back in the first world war.
I personally love the term Your Mate. 

As in when someone stuffs up: “They’re your mate.” Use it all the time. 

I just think “Old Mate” sounds as hackneyed as “Cobber”, that’s all.

But the passion in this thread is not lost on me.
*faint

A "feint" is most commonly a move in fencing/swordplay or boxing/fighting sports.

*(yeah, I'm that guy, downvote away - sorry!)*
Old mate isn’t even that rural as far as slang goes. I grew up in the suburbs and have been hearing it as long as I can remember.
Hate to be a pendant, but in the context you're using it, ie _'me/my old mate'_ I believe that it's slightly different. The generic _'old mate'_  is the term, rather than specifically _'your old mate'_, or _'my old mate'_, which is probably where the phrase derived from, but is not specifically what is being referred to here.
Glitchless too
Only absolute losers check a poster’s history looking for ammo to use. 

It happens when they are so bereft of a coherent reply that they think they can trip them up by looking at past threads. 

I was going to inspect your Reddit history so I could try to zing you. But I quickly remembered that I wasn’t as lame as you. 

Please feel free to quote anything I have ever said on Reddit, if you want to. I couldn’t give a shit.
It’s not, honestly. 

I simply have not heard the term used commonly in conversation before that. 

Of course I’ve heard the term before. But not to the extent it is used now. 

When younger people said it, it seems odd from their lips.
Yeah. Someone beat you old mate.
Don’t worry. Any delusions of grandeur have been shattered. 

I have been soundly told that my thoughts on the matter do not matter.
Phew! Lucky it’s not you then.

But seriously, this is really embarrassing. Can you tell me if there’s any way to delete my post?
It's \*almost\* as derogatory as "Your mate"

i.e. "ohhhhh look... it's Your Mate"
It would be the easiest option for me to say it was a shitpost, as my copium for the passionate objections. 

But it’s true. I hate the phrase Old Mate. And when someone young uses it in conversation, I find it grating.
I first heard it sometime in the 10s when I lived in Cairns, I thought it was a Qld thing. Never heard it in SA growing up
Been living under a rock apparently. 

Deadset, I never heard it used in conversation until it seemed to become popular in the last few years.
Old mate reckons they can tell me to stop saying old mate
Old mate doesn’t know anyone who lives or works in the City
It's always used as a mild insult. Even if it is someone you like, they have done something stupid/are stupid.
hahahaha yeah nah all good, im a bit dyslexic..i was on a WoW thread before and got them mixed up :P
Nah, OP'll need to feint when they try clobber him. I maintain okay usage
Look at old mate getting triggered over here
You’d think old mate would have enough of the downvotes by now. But nah, just keep diggin mate, you’ll end up in China
You sound a bit triggered there chief.
It's the eye roll from whoever I'm talking when  mentioning "old mate" which entertains me the most.
My parents have been using it since before I could walk
Yeap Look at old mate up there now with everyone calling him old mate.
Nah that's "your mate", usually used as a term to describe somebody that you would prefer to definitely not be your mate.


Old mate is similar to the Irish "your man", a descriptor for a person that all participants in a conversation are aware of without naming them.
Gotta drop that threat somehow.
That’s an understatement. 

I have never heard more gratuitous use of Old Mate in my life.
Why would I care about downvotes?
Yup, I agree.

My mate = my friend

Old mate = neutral or insulting- particularly if you should know them, eg not even worthy of knowing

Your mate = insulting, eg not even good enough to be my mate
You tell me mate, you seem to enjoy them so much
People shouldn’t be discouraged by downvotes or criticism. Any discourse is good discourse, unless it descends into a slanging match. 

A downvote on Reddit is a vote that your contribution did not sit well with an individual. Nothing more. It has no tangible value. 

I fear that by even replying, you will accuse me of caring. So be it.
