Anyone know what this means? I have seen a few full masked guys making this around my neighbourhood, is it street art or some sort of pickup point?
It's a monkey
https://www.instagram.com/sunfigosunfigo?igsh=MXc2ZmF5cnhlNjE0ag==

Street art by Sunfigo.
Just some public art
The nature of Monkey was irrepressible
*Just waiting for a primate*
ape together strong
A signal to guide Tripitaka?
It’s art, darling
In the worlds before Monkey, primal chaos reigned.  
Canberra sought order.  
But the Rooty Hill Bogan can only drive when its six-pack of VB tinnies has shown.  
The four coasts girt by sea formed again and yet again,  
As endless aeons wheeled and passed.  
Time and the pure essences of Canberra,  
The moisture of the Perth,  
The powers of Bert & Patti Newton  
All worked upon a certain rock, old as creation (or at least Johnny Farnham).  
And it became magically fertile.  
That first egg was named "Oy mate! hows ya' goin'".  
'Winnie Blues and a Big M', the Father Albo, said,  
"With our atheletes, we make the gold medals."  
Olympic forces caused the egg to hatch.  
From it then came a ribbon on a chain link fence!.  
The nature of Monkey was irrepressible!
12 monkeys
You're in the territory of the Monkey Gang. They will expect bananas from you at the start of every month.
It’s a fence.
These have been around Burnley area in Melbourne for years now. There were a couple other forms as well.
A chimp for a secret pick up point? Mate, you do realise everyone has personal gps devices these days.
Planet of the Apes is starting
Monke
For Caesar!!!!
Chimpbanksy
Hahahah the fact that op thinks people are arranging drug deals by first thatching a monkeys face through a link fence to signify the meeting location is the funniest fucking thing I’ve read and then subsequently imagined all week.

*breath*

Thank you op.
Oh wow . 
This is still happening.  
Used to see them all the time 10 years ago around Flemington and surrounding suburbs.
Banksy. Sell the fence
hehe monke
Have we gone so far that we're now afraid of .... \*checks notes\* art?
It's art.  What is wrong with Australians that they don't know art when they see it?
Lancelot Link fence
Rise in the Planet of the Apes, must either be a warning or a declaration of war
At high school, I knew a kid that did "animal tags"

Kieran, that you?
Monke
Guerilla art?
No idea but has Gorillaz band vibe to me
Dicks out for Harambe
I remember seeing them towards the Hoddle St end of the Eastern Freeway and there is one next to Wheeler’s Hill library that is sadly disintegrating. They make me smile.
A tribute to Caesar
It's very clever I love it
Planet of the Apes. We are done boys
It’s a Fence. Usually built to keep people out, or in or to delineate a property line
Some awesome ass monkey that some shit cunt will probably rip down because we aren’t allowed nice things and if they can’t be happy no one else can either!!!
MONKEY. I personally like the lion on corner of separation St and St Georges Rd.
Saw one at South Melbourne just yesterday
Art
Andross propaganda
This domain is protected by Hit-Monkey
An artist monkeying around.
If you snap a photo of them all you get a gorilla suit
Look like monk
A fence
Looks like a fence homie.
Pogo
Monkee
12 monkeys 

Shits getting real
Monke
Johnny Chimpo and his weed gang
Small scale "Planet Of The Apes", "Suburb Of The Apes"
It's obviously a meet up point for the underground monkey drug dealing society. Keep clutching your pearls.
Mojo Jojo is making his return!
Art
monke
Looks like a fence
The army of the 12 monkeys.
It was put up for when lion king came to Melbourne to advertise it, there were lions aswell,  some have just lasted 🤷🏼‍♀️
People in Australia are so uncultured they ask reddit what street art is….
It's not the same Mufusa done over and over and over for 15 plus years in Melbourne. Some tosser has done "DANDE" in Ferntree Gully like they're some kind of silver spoon gangster
Looks like Hit Monkey
Planet of the apes
monky
Someones public art.
Ooh ooh aah aah..
male kimp?
Apes together strong
Never question the monkey! You must now start a monkey worshipping cult to make amends.
Monkey Magic.
An eruv.
Banksy
A Fence. :)
Artic monkeys ?
Apes together strong.
hit monkey
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RihLMHqNuTw&list=PL0C7FFC602521F7A9
monkey time!
Genghis Khan
A fence?
Monkey Magic
Call all autobots

Message from optimus primal.
Art.
Always wondered what this was , I see it everywhere along the train lines
Awesome! This looks awesome is what it is!
Harambe, the down fall started when they killed Harambe
Buy. Hold. DRS.
I saw it in my area as well
Harambe?
Wasn't this stuff originally put up when the Lion King stage performance was on?
I thought I was in the Fallout subreddit.
City?
Blender
Planet of the Apes is real.. except currently the Ape Government is in hiding.. operating within shadowy cabals.. this is a sign that thier meeting house is nearby .. good find op!
Street art
Sell your house and move to somewhere remote! The rise of the planet of the apes has started!
What a weird question
Used to see the same sort've art but lions around melbourne.
There's one in docklands, Melbourne too!
[Mmm... monkey...](https://youtu.be/oD9nAHuZsJU?si=RlYmbidpZEo1wO0f)
Repulse Monkey.
Monkey magic!  Or ad for the new Planet of the Apes?
Love these. First one I spotted was on Kings Way, decades ago.
Return to Monke.
It's a meeting spot for a gang of violent drug dealers called "The Monkey Boys"....or y'know, some ribbon tied to a fence. Either or.
Monkey man call card
There used to be a lion in Burnley at the golf course near the roundabout
It’s a fun lil guy
MONKE
M O N K E
Robomonkey
Gorilla Art
amazing art but I wonder if it is legal
You are late. This appeared in my neighborhood half a decade ago!
A warning from monke not to touch grass
Dognappers hun
That is a warning for the Monkegue Bridge which is just to the right of frame.
Yart
If I'm not mistaken, there was a series of these put up as advertising for the Lion King stage show.

There are still remnants of those original ones remaining, and it looks like  some peeps continued the idea.
That's Treemonkey from Reddy I think lol
It's easier to clean than graffiti. To be encouraged.
Haven't seen one of those in a long time.
Looks like a monkey, if I’m honest.
return to monke
That's a fence.
12 monkeys
It’s like graffiti but on the fence. I’ve seen someone do this too but it was not noticeable since they used yellow strings
Ape Sinistar.
Monkey magic 🐵
Looks like a variant of street art. Pretty dope!
Art. Look it up /s
It is an ape
Gorillaz
Looks like Gorilla Marketing
Monkey face
It’s a fence, they surround most things.
Looks like a fence decorated with some rather cool artwork.
Its a fence
It must be that Nate Higgers I’ve been hearing about. I was even linked to this subreddit because of him.
Fight club
Looks cool. What material is is made of?
Black Myth Wukong release marketing
That's Gorillaz
Harambe
It’s the ape gang don’t f with them they are bananas
It’s amazing is what that is
It's a calling... to return to monke
Reject modernity.
Art you pleb
There was a lion in South Yarra on chainlink fence. Not sure if he’s still there.
Monke
Monke
Monke
Mmm monke
Monke
Monke
Monke
Monke
Looks like a low poly monkey from Old School RuneScape
A waste of plastic. 

A person who makes one has to buy a lot of plastic(similar to the old supermarket bags) it then gets brittle due to exposure to the elements before it starts to fall apart and ends up in the stormwater drains.
Imagine needing to post this as a question. You're not very bright are you, op?
Is monke
r/monke
Monke
monke
Mmmm... monke
Monke
It's extremely crappy art
12 monkeys!
It’s a fence
it might look like a monkey, but it's really just some junk from a bin blown against the fence by the wind
could be an ape.
Its a fence
I remember 2 years ago these were all over melbourne, even in the suburbs
Thats really cool
Public Art? In Sydney? Better shut that shit down quick
In the worlds before Monkey, primal chaos reigned.
I read this in that voice without even thinking .. wish the reboot had been better.
A eunuch should not take pride in his chastity
Just watching over Monty, waiting for it to claim another scalp
Gold
I laughed WAAAAY harder at this than i shouldve
So there should be a Pigsy and a Sandy nearby?
_derivative_
Gorillaz - fire coming out of the monkeys head   ?
I ran it through ChatGPT and it confirmed it was a fence.

But, it might not be as AI doesn’t know much about fences or fencing in general because it was accidentally blocked during the AI training.
I'm okay with the typo
Yeah I think they were in cocklands as well
Easiest to spot pickup point in the world lmao
‘Pick up point’… like life’s a video game and criminals use a logo
Sad that I'm old enough to get that joke.
Gorilla art
Gorillaz next album cover ?
yeah pretty sure this is at the tram depot
Stop posting that right meow
No it’s actually got a meaning behind it, I was told once but completely forgot but if I find out I’ll put it on this thread cause it was many many many moons ago- this monkey had been around for 10+ more years I don’t know if they do it for the same reason these days though
Ohh. I've seen that. Was so shoddily done, I thought it said "Darude".

Had Sandstorm stuck in my head for the following week.
It's art...
Why are you being downvoted?  What the fuck does the OP think it might be?
That's a lie.  It's not art.
Little monkey fella 
looks more like doctor zaius.... or maybe cornelius?
Someone call Bruce Willis and get him outta retirement.
..time to look for The Witness!
Yeah then there is your army of the 12 monkeys factor...
Argh! Get Outta My Chair!!
so it begins.
Nah, just 1.
Mon-KEY
Jumping on the fence
Planet of the apes is finally coming true!
It's a great ape.
Not doing so much these days.   The street art scene scattered a bit over covid.
Pretty sure it's Melbourne not Sydney
The phoenix can fly only when its feathers are grown.
IYKYK
So fenced in?
That’s your opinion. Regardless of what you think it is it will still most likely end up in the ocean.
Play a record, you’re talking shit
Damn I miss Monkey News, thank you for reminding me.
Chimpanzee to chimpans A
Bruce started it. Now he's gotta finish it.
That explains it
Phew
The four worlds formed again and yet again.
Wow, nice meta-pickup my bro.
Ooh, chimpanzee that! *monkey news, you ffff*
Time, and the pure essences of heaven, the moisture of the earth, the powers of the sun and the moon, all worked upon a certain rock, old as creation.
Chimpanzee that monkey news ya (strains)cuuuuuuuuunnnt
Elemental forces caused the egg to hatch, and from it came forth a stone monkey...
Steven: ah yes thanks for that rick.
The nature of Monkey was irrepressible!
MONKEEEYYYYYYYY
I love to fight!
I would have downvoted if you had excluded the exclamation mark.
Nah Pigsy all the way
🎼🎶 Born from an egg on a mountain top
🎶 Born from an egg on a mountaintop! 🎶
I was always strangely attracted to Tripitaka
Funkiest monkey that ever hopped
I lack emotes. I am emotenless :(
