Hey! The hubs and I plus our dog and two cats rented a camper van that broke down in between Melbourne and Sydney. It’s been 16 hours. The rental company is dogging it and has not given us a solution and claims to be “working on it”. 

What are our options? 😭😭 hoping we can get to Sydney and figure out a plan. We are supposed to be in Cairns (where we live) by Sunday (it’s Friday)

Thanks🤍
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Hertz and Budget have 24 hr breakdown service.

Who was this with?

If you have RACQ I would ring for breakdown service.
Keep calling the rental company. Do not stop calling them until you get a result. 

I had a rental car get a flat tyre on day 1 of a family snow holiday a few years back. Was 2hrs south of Melbourne at a ski resort in the snow.

"take the kids ahead babe, I'll just throw the spare on"

There was no spare, nor a compressor, nor a can of goop. Stupid Merc GLE on runflats. No replacement tyres in the country(!). Right then, drive the shitbox 40 mins to the nearest tyre shop and get it patched. Unrepairable. 

Sat there for 5hrs calling Europcar repeatedly until it finally got escalated and a woman from Adelaide called me and arranged a replacement car to be sent out to my location on a flatbed. Brand new X5 turned up 2hrs later and they took the GLE back with them. I missed the entire day with the family as a result. Cunt of a day but at least they fixed it in the end (I never paid for the flat either).

Lesson is, keep calling them.
Call the rental company and demand they send RAC to come and fix the van now. Otherwise, you will be calling Fair Trading.
Spam their twitter! 

Honestly, probably the only way you'll get their attention. 

If you feel bad, give them a call and say you are going to do it unless they fix it in the next few hours.

Also, might be worth checking your insurances to see if you have any cover for this.
Who is rental company? “Take ya chance rentals”?
I had a hire car blow an engine while driving back to Melbourne airport (Avis). Yes they had roadside assistance but it took ages and they obviously don't expect issues and go for the cheapest coverage because  it did not include any cover for me to actually get from the side of the road to the airport. The lady was nice but said, sorry you need to find your own way . They informed me I could leave the car by the side of the road for the tow truck driver to pick up, but if anything happened to the car I would be liable. So I waited in the dark with the dead car until the tow truck driver arrived and he was nice enough to stay around until an uber picked me up instead of leaving me alone on the side of the road with my bags. Avis refunded my uber fare but I had to push for it. Funniest thing was I got a call from Avis a week later asking if I knew where the tow truck driver took the car because they had lost it. I had no idea where they took it and I really didn't care.
Guys it got sorted pretty soon after OP posted this because they haven’t engaged with any replies.
Don't get in Ivan Milatts van.
Um I dont know if this would work but are you in the RACQ? You could try and see if you can get a rental from them, generally you are covered for breakdown no matter what vehicle you are driving. Not sure how that would work reciprocally in NSW though.

I think if it was me I would be looking into some other form of transport.

Did you rent this van in Cairns?

Also contact your own car insurance company and see if they can help, some policies do cover rentals in some form.

I would be spamming the rental company.
Well it is up to the rental company to replace.  


A while ago some campers broke down at a tourist spot (In Tasmania), about an hour out of Hobart.  The camper rental company was at Hobart Airport, and the company got a tow Truck to take a new camper out to them, and return the old one.   


Not exactly half way between 2 major cities, but the point stands, replacement van.  Brand company or some fly by night Cheap company you used ?
Who's it with?

I'd be asking to speak to a manager to get some answers. It might actually be hard for them to find a solution if you're in the middle of nowhere - not everyone can tow or service a camper van. If they can't give you an answer on what they're doing, ask them to give you a solution. Check your contract and see what it says about breakdown.
How big is the company? If they have to drive out a new van from where you picked the last one up it probably will take a couple of days to organise and deliver. Like they wouldn't necessarily have two people on call available to drive up to you at a moment's notice (need two because they might not be able to drive the broken down van back with them).

Or even if they pay for a van to be rented from a different company for you, the logistics of getting it to you are not straight forward. They still need two people to do it.

Keep calling them but also Australia is a big place so have some reasonable expectations.
Put me if the whole camper hire thing. Fuck that! What company?
[deleted]
I'd take a punt on some dodgy outfit like Jucy or Wicked.
Do you mean two hours north? Two hours south of Melbourne and you’re in Sorrento or
Google reviews can be effective to get a businesses attention too
Or they’re too busy trying to hitchhike.
Even if they have a spare van they need to find a second car and two people in order to drive the van to OP and then potentially drive back in the car if the broken down van can't be fixed. While at the same time performing all their normal work functions running their storefront etc.

If OP is like 6 hours drive away, that is a 12 hour day for two people. So I can see why that would take a bit of time to organise.
That's terrible advice. Their rental contract will include parts on break down and both of the things you suggested won't be the process.
That's some Facebook grade advice right there
wicked are arseholes. Someone slashed one of the tires when I was camping several hours from Darwin. I changed the tyre but it was flat and they refused to provide any help. Had to walk several kms to another campsite and luckily some nice locals drove me back with a compressor and helped me out.
Yeah brainfade. Marysville
If the company has 2 braincells at the management level, they should have that planned out.

Their own tow truck, or third party, swap old with new, and bring back, as well as having a mechanic to fix.

It is the cost of performing business operations.
