
I am a sovereign union and I don't consent
When even lifelong Laborites are saying "good" to this... you know your Union done fucked up.
Why do the members not kick the bosses out?
So it seems that the ALP is tougher on the unions than the LNP has ever been: Hawke/Keating introduced the Industrial Relations Acts to neuter our right to strike, and now Albo's introducing laws allowing the Federal government to kick out union bosses who don't do what they're told.
Probably needed but i'll say careful there...  consider how it could be used in future by a hostile government.
I'm not a fan of the CFMEU but these are yet to be proven media allegations. How does a "democratic" government legally act on allegations??? Get the evidence then act. ps I know this isn't a true democracy but let's at least go through the process.
Fuck this is horse shit. Not one charge laid, just trial by media
How much was a farce was that royal commission into unions that missed this?
In their prosecution of a factional witchhunt the quisling fucks in Labor betray the labour movement yet again
Disgusting. Despite LNP scare-mongering, the unions don't have too much influence over the ALP, the ALP have too much influence over the union movement.
I'd like to remind everyone the royal commission into the union movement, which happened under PM Abbott, was clearly a witch-hunt, cost taxpayers nearly $50 million, and achieved only _one_ prosecution of a union official. Now all this song and dance over claims involving a small number of officials in an organisation of literally _thousands._ They want to turn CFMEU into a tame union like SDA. Will they go after RAFFWU next?
Australians love ceding power to capitalists! Amazing how well Aussies can be manipulated into manufactured consent for the sake of capital. Labor Party shouldn’t be allowed to use that name.
Lots of people asking for the end of the CFMEU without realising they do the most for safety on job sites. You’ll be seeing a lot more serious injuries/deaths if the CFMEU is shut down
Long overdue that these thugs were cleaned up
Unions have their place in the world but they gotta play nice.
I have some friends on the *HARD* left of Labor, and even they agree that the CFMEU is bloated and should probably be broken up.
They're staunch
Cause they will find guys in black and a balaclava with tire irons outside their house at 5.10am

https://www.9news.com.au/national/cfmeu-queensland-cross-river-rail-worker-blames-union-for-predawn-assault/bb650394-147e-4332-83db-1fba8cfc3065
The members are benefitting while keeping their hands clean. Would you if in their shoes?
Thuggish union officials have been destroying the union movement since the beginning of time. This is only the natural result.
Welp Shit   
i Love working in the goverment Funded Corpo Mandated Sweatshops :)
While the criminal elements inside the union and the corrupt should be forced out, warned off and hopefully defenster them selves 

  
I still support the boys getting paid 200k a year to do half a days work because if they didnt that cash would be in the pocket of some scumbag developer. On ya boys. dont hate on them for the neck tats and jet skis. 

Always remember that unions exist to extract the maximum for their members.  business has fucked most workers and industry in not sharing from the extreme profits in recent decades. 

Join your union, create a union, put the owner of the business in the boot of a car full of bricks and go off roading and get you and the crew a fat raise.
That's what you get when you "fail to consent", apparently.
Nope, nothing compared to what John Howard passed.
Albo is trying to not look “weak on unions” and not let LNP get a talking point. Now this is also a double edged sword as it means they might lose the union vote.
Not at all, Howard introduced the ABCC in 2005, which acts as an independent statutory authority of the Australian Government, responsible for promoting understanding and enforcing workplace relations compliance in the Australian building and construction industry. This was abolished under labours Rudd government in 2012 and reinstated under the LNPs Turnbull government in 2016. It was the abolished again under Albanese in 2022. Although the ABCCs responsibility’s were transferred over to other authorities, the ABCC was purpose built to be tough on union corruption.
Well, labor has been LNP-lite this term, so it makes sense for them to take that stance all the way
If Labor do it, it’s “reasonable and much needed reform”, when the Liberals try to do so much as ask them to have fire extinguishers at their headquarters it’s “an attack on the unions”.
All the more reason the CFMEU should be consenting to having administrators take oversight of them. If they really cared about the safety of their members they'd do everything in their power to keep those operations up and running, not force the government's hand to take harsher measures.
They don’t want an end to the Cmfeu, they want an end to the mob type rule and want transparency
Nope. It’s a tug of war in which one team starts with all the power. Unions playing nice with capitalists is how we all get turned into human batteries.
Yeah as much as I hate to admit it, having moved to Finland which is highly unionized, the unions seem very susceptible to becoming mafia like outfits.
They feed money in, and it gets blown on fines + legal fees from constantly losing. I don't get the appeal
also their wage increase naturally impacts lots of other wages because it make business compete for talent. Look at what was happening before the migrant taps were turned back on! Wages were rising across the board.
My issue with the tradies on 200k for half a day is lots of these projects are public money (me, as a tax payer). I'm all for good pay but not by ripping me off. Same goes for the ndis rort. Saying that though, I'd be hard pressed to believe the members did not know criminal behaviour was occurring in the union, as an outsider I knew.... And if I was in the union I wouldn't be happy with it
>Always remember that unions exist to extract the maximum for their members.

I think the point here is that the CFMEU has clearly forgotten that mandate
In the pocket of some scumbag developer? Most of the union jobs are with the Tier 1’s and 2’s that are lucky to make a 2% margin - not uncommon to lose money as well
> I still support the boys getting paid 200k a year to do half a days work because if they didnt that cash would be in the pocket of some scumbag developer.

that's not how markets work. if there is excess profits being made, more developed would spring up.

you are also forgetting that these unions are placing pressure on government to restrict immigrants on skilled visas for construction

you have a pretty rosy view of unions. do you also stand by the SDA?
Unfortunately for CFMEU, they have set a precedent, and the government doesn't like it.

Why should dropkicks and crooks get $200k a year instead of health professionals, etc? 

Because their union asks for it? Now other unions are asking for it, and the Vic government is broke.
Is this satire?
Apt
And that was the end of him.
Even most unionists think the CFMEU is a criminal enterprise
ALP - Another Liberal Party
Aka, make them weak as fuck like useless unions such as the SDA 
They appointed patched members of the Bandidos to cfmeu positions.
They like being part of a powerful mob. They are indoctrinated into the mentality that anyone saying anything negative about the union at all is an enemy, and that everything the union does is justified for the benefit of the collective
can't have that. think of the coffee shop owners!
fuck the shoppes bro. most unions are weak atm. 

however cfmeu have got the wages for the boys
I dont have the answers all I know is that the cost of living is fucking out of control, people need more money, health and teachers are grossly underpaid and should be paid more.

where that money comes from I dont know.
nope
Just your typical attitude from a CFMEU bikie.
It didn't spell the end of him. Workchoices did when he directly attached wages and conditions and gave employers too much power. Unfair dismissal and such were made useless.


The first steps John Howard did were union busting laws, like making sympathy strikes illegal, gave the employers the right to sue unions etc....
No we don’t. So far it’s a handful of shitty people near the top in 1 state. Not the rank and file, (which is the real union) or other states.


There is no place for criminals in the labor movement, and not just because the media pick at even a hint of it like vultures and immediately attempt to widen the brush as much as possible.
A real unionist would never cede union power over this - capitalists don’t just give back power
It’s a dangerous line to walk, sure. Stay away from government overrule while not ending up in a jimmy Hoffa scenario
That is both nothing new and just a symptom of a pervasive culture of bullying and corruption.
I’d rather that then for the benefit of a sole billionaire, or sending it offshore.
The money comes from the government, that's the point. Government is building "stuff", and the CFMEU and their bikie mates are charging top dollar for it. Meanwhile the nurses, teachers, police, paramedics are getting paid a pittance because the government is putting all their money to criminal thugs who run the construction racket.
So why don't they kick the top out?
As an outsider I've seen the cfmeu as bullies and criminals for over 10 years. It's not just top...
>So far it’s a handful of shitty people near the top in 1 state.

More like the whole eastern seaboard. The shit the CFMEU has been getting up to in Vic, NSW, and QLD is more than just the head of the fish being rotten...
Guess who is paying for the massive increase in costs for projects and the degradation of quality?
So you don't understand how economics and business work.

If the cost of a job is X, then the price will be X + contingency + margin.  The contingency will be higher and directly based on expected disruption and foreseeable problems. The more the union adds to the cost of the job, the higher the aggregate of the margin. So the harder the union goes, the more risk for the company. The more risk, the higher the contingency AND the higher the margin. All this results in a higher price tag for the developer, which is usually the state and federal governments or our superannuation funds. If it is infrastructure, it means either higher taxes for everyone or less money for services. If it is a large scale housing project, it means higher price tag at sale time. It also delays these projects by years and decades because it makes it harder to finance. So at the end of it, the head contractor makes more money over a longer period (or goes broke in the middle of it), while small subbies who don't have the same resources or bargaining power get reamed and often go broke, while everyone else pays a bigger bill at the end. Oh and our hospitals and roads remain overcrowded because each project has massively inflated costs and delays the start of the next one because there is no money left. Same goes for housing.
As a nurse, it shits me. One problem is as nurses we can't "stop work". So our strike is worthless. At best we drop eoek staffin for an hour or two a day. And don't document certain things. Oh the government must be shivering in their boots. It's why our pay rises suck.. Only way I could get close to 200k would be 80 hour weeks... But the hospital won't pay ot so no chance anyway
I’m hoping that’s the plan. Dig them out by the roots.
The problem has nothing to do with striking. 

There is no comparison to the CFMEUs representation compared to other unions. 

It's like the ANF saying they represent all nurses, but they only actually care about what happens in an ICU ward, and only in the ones in major hospitals.
80 hr weeks is how labourers get 200k as well. A site I worked was the first to make the minimum 100k for 40hr week but we had plenty of trades on less and it was contentious with the union. We regularly asked our CWs to do 10-14 hr days 6 days a week plus often Sundays or night shift depending on the changing environment always at little notice.
I feel u and u deserve it 

u need to strike to get it legal or not

u will piss off huge amounts of people and some peoples health care will be negatively effected however that is the price that is paid to be paid.
Not true.  ANMF has good representation and a lot of members.  We just have no power to strike because our striking is limited because it affects people's lives
Yeah nah I call bs
"some people's health care will be negatively affected" when hospitals are too understaffed people die. That's why nurses can't strike the way other unions do. That's not "a price to be paid". That is a huge deal
It's exactly what we can't do, even if we wanted to. As nurses we don't put people's lives at risk for the sake of money....ethically and morally it's wrong. And that's why our bargaining power is limited.
I just spoke to a backpacker mate in Melbourne who earns $34ph casual ($70kpa) as a construction labourer through an agency. Generally the job site changes almost daily. On a union job it is $50ph casual which if you work every week of the year equals 104k.
The EBAs are available free online for all to read lol. CW3 is the standard trade qualified rate. A normal 40 hour week grosses most people around $130,000 max a year.
I fully get u

however........
You're missing penalties mate
yeah that's gross... 130k....  For a nurse with 10 years experience BASE pay no penalties is around 100k....
