
>Some Australians have criticised Prime Minister Anthony Albanese

What a nothing article. I doubt there's anything the PM does that "some Australians" wouldn't criticise.
Geez, it's not like it says "eat less avo toast"
Labor finally manages to get a message out there about what it's done and the media is ready to slam them. Oh it's so cringe let's talk about nuclear powered fantasies instead.
Meh, at least he has a message to share. We can diss him for more important things than that.
SoMe AuStRaLiAnS
What a load of horseshit. Some millennial intern made this. Do they really think Albo has the time and to be frank, the skillset to produce this? They can’t poke holes in the policies, so instead they go for the presentation. Actually pathetic.
Not wrong about cringe. Most of these policies don't come in for months or even YEARS later, and the rent assistance is fuck all (on top of a next-to-nothing jobseeker/austudy increase)

Clearly forgot his own origins and that it's worse today then his day.
Sometimes you just gotta get down with them hip hop politicians
Tone deaf Albo. Should have done something to help RBA in reining in inflation. Now that everyone are under the bridge, his 75 AUD is gonna go a long way
Eh it's harmless cringe. About on level what I expected from a pollie.

.
They just need to stop spending our money to brag about their "achievements" on social media. It makes it look like they are just doing it for Polly Points.
Only the squares would criticise this...it's a call out to his musical taste (which isn't too bad) and I think not a bad advertisement for the achievements that have been made so far...I mean, what would Spud and his followers use??
An out of touch, privileged politician. 

Never seen that before.
Some Australians have criticised the author of this article. If some criticise me we’ll get stuck in a loop.
It's pretty cringe. Doesn't mean it's offensive in any way.
yea its just to get attention on the policies

idiots getting angry about it helps spread it i guess
They do it because it's dirt cheap. You're not going to see any real savings if they stop.
You think he opened up Photoshop and made that image himself?
Ok, but what from photo is incorrect? I vote based on policy passed, so what is not valid?
Do you really think he got out the ole photoshop and whipped this up?
My usual response of this is "name 3 Australians thst critised albanese"
