
Let's be serious. The ADF and government don't particularly care about Indonesia's domestic policies. They're more concerned with being able to use their standing army of roughly 3 million soldiers as a shield against another Asian country. Something about China
I get the argument of the realpolitik of it all, but it is still absolutely fucked (morally) that we have, and are looking to deeping military ties with a country that is actively running a [violent colonial program ](https://www.genocidewatch.com/country-pages/indonesia)to drive out, replace and subjugate the native Papuans in West Papua.
Indonesia also doing naval drills with Russia .
How about condemning them for using drones to kill native Papuans.
Seriously against this, Indonesia is a shifty country who persecutes its own minorities.
Can we convince them.to buy our Collins submarines ?
I am sure it will facilitate property investments for the Indonesians with the property investment fast track clause as well as more student place for their kids. Its something Indonesia has always been  asking for.   Terima kasih banyak  for the property investment!.
This is an absolutely terrible decision. Just last week Indonesians new president announced closer relations to russia. 

This is a really bad move for Australia wtf..
Oh, and our aircraft carriers that can't carry aircraft while you're at it.
I wouldn't even say it's their manpower. They just want assurances that they won't let an enemy through their territory. It's practically Impossible to attack australia without going through indonesia
yeah... it may not be the most moral decision but politically it makes sense
Indonesia doesn't have 3 million soldiers, they have about 400,000 soldiers. China has the world's largest army with 2,000,000 soldiers. China has over 1,500,000 more soldiers than Australia and Indonesia combined.
[https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2021/november/1635685200/zacharias-szumer/who-runs-mines-papua#mtr](https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2021/november/1635685200/zacharias-szumer/who-runs-mines-papua#mtr) some background on mining in the region.
I mean.... We had a violent colonial program that drove out natives .... Why can't they?


Adding an /s because someone took it too literally
Oh man.  Which nation could we ally with that doesn't do anything like this?
yeah unlike us civilised folk, who only back the creation of state for the SOUL EXPRESS purpose of using our spy agency and immense political power to fuck said new country out of the oceanic oil fields that should RIGHTLY BE IN THEIR territorial waters.
Australia is literally in a Five Power Defence Arrangements with Malaysia, a state that officially enshrines Malay Supremacy at the expense of ethnic minorities (Chinese, Indians, and indigenous people) and enforces Islam as state religion. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_Power_Defence_Arrangements
Yeah, but please provide me a list of countries that don't do this?
The same thing can be said about us.
Probably not as they've already signed a contract to buy French Submarines.
Prabowo says the same thing in every country he visit. It's just a form of Indonesian-style politeness and neutrality.

Prabowo Subianto Aims to Boost Economic Relations with France
https://www.viva.co.id/english/1736271-prabowo-subianto-aims-to-boost-economic-relations-with-france

Turkiye is Indonesia's strategic partner: Prabowo https://en.antaranews.com/news/320627/turkiye-is-indonesias-strategic-partner-prabowo

During Tokyo visit, Indonesia’s Prabowo seeks stronger ties with Japan https://www.benarnews.org/english/news/indonesian/indonesian-president-elect-prabowo-subianto-japan-visit-04032024171443.html

Prabowo promises close ties with China in meeting with Xi https://www.thejakartapost.com/world/2024/04/02/prabowo-promises-close-ties-with-china-in-meeting-with-xi.html
Helicopters are aircraft...
The Canberra class ships aren't intended to carry fixed wing aircraft, this isn't the gotcha that you think it is.
I think you've missed my point. You've also not included any of their irregular troops and forgotten entirely about the fact Indonesia is a massive archipelago teeming with, well...natives.

China would have to go over or around the world's largest Muslim nation to get here.
Thirty-five years ago they taught us about the copper sulphate in the OK Tedi river, the whole thing was brilliant blue.
We should meet them halfway by re-colonising Papua New Guinea.
This is a terrible comment, I hope the people upvoting are not aware of what’s happening to the indigenous population of west Papua. 

Just because one group of people have done terrible things in the past does not make it ok to do the same. 

Australians should be deeply ashamed of this decision by our government, it’s highly immoral and shows we haven’t learnt from our past mistakes as a country.
Iceland seems pretty chill.
That’s a stupid excuse. As Aussies we supposed to stand for good, not brush it aside. 
Didn't we do that too ?
I think you've missed my point. I was only correcting your statement about Indonesia having a standing army of 3 million, which they don't, it's not even close. I made no comment about China invading, I brought China into the discussion only because they have the world's largest army which is 2 million soldiers. That's 1 million less than you claimed Indonesia had as a standing army, also why bring up irregular troops when they're not traditionally included in a nation's standing army count.
Can't they have East Timor back?
That would risk dragging us into NATO, with lots of colonial baggage.

Also:

The recorded history of Iceland began with the settlement by Viking explorers and the people they enslaved from Western Europe

So nah.
Yes. But unlike the Barricuda which had to be designed first, the Scorpene class submarine already exists and is operated by several nations like Malaysia and Brazil so it's actually a proven design.
Because irregular troops are relevant in the circumstances I guess.  Indonesia does military service too right, so they are trained
That's a novel idea, something that actually works. Perhaps we should run that by our military procurement guys
They don't.
Well, we are getting Virginia class subs.
Scorpène was evaluated in the same program and turned down for not meeting the program's requirements. 

As has already been pointed out, the RAN is now planning to acquire the Virginia class to replace the Collins and they are much more capable than the Scorpène in every metric.
