
Throw away the bread, grab a spoon, and go to town!
Most non-Australians don't realise just how thin you're supposed to spread it.  They treat it like Nutella or something.

For new people it's literally just a tiny scraping, like a #1 or #2 from this chart here: [https://www.couriermail.com.au/lifestyle/food/qld-taste/vegemite-on-toast-poll-how-much-is-too-much/news-story/afa0ac600c1388ceef3ccfeefb0b8658](https://www.couriermail.com.au/lifestyle/food/qld-taste/vegemite-on-toast-poll-how-much-is-too-much/news-story/afa0ac600c1388ceef3ccfeefb0b8658)
ive been eating from birth so ill sometimes just spoon it from the jar. but the best way to start is thinly spread on toast with butter and cheese (melted or not) works well too. start small and increase to your taste.
Lottsa butter and a little Vegemite...
Toast the bread, apply butter and spread the Vegemite thinly, less is more.
Vegemite on toast also pairs well with cheese and scrambled eggs.
I have it on buttered toast and very, very little Vegemite.  My niece loves Vegemite sandwiches.  A lot of kids take Vegemite sandwiches (with butter) to school for lunch.

Yes, it is very much an acquired taste.  A lot of parents give Vegemite toast to their very young kids to get used to it.  

You've just reminded me, I used to put it on toast and then top it with scramble eggs.  That was pretty good.
Toast your bread of choice. Spread thickly with butter, then a thinner application of Vegemite. Top with a poached egg.
Jesus put some butter on that bread for a start
Some mildly interesting history for you. The recipe changed fifteen years ago - https://thewest.com.au/news/world/vegemite-recipe-changes-for-first-time-in-85-years-ng-ya-245247 The majority clearly found the change in flavour to be subtle, some found unsubtle to point of ruinous. 


So... If the hot toast & melting butter w/vegemite combo still leaves you unimpressed, at least enjoy the smell from the open jar. That hasn't changed and still great. Also cheaper than a scented candle! :)
Smear it all over your body and you'll never get bitten by mosquitos.
Hot pasta. 50g butter, 2 tbsp Vegemite 😋
Hey

The other day an Aussie friend brought me a jar of Vegemite, when she returned to Switzerland, where I live.

Well… Yesterday I gave it a try. Well… well… How to say? That's quite an acquired taste, isn't it?

How do you eat that? Pure on bread/toast? Or how do you make it a bit (like in: A LOT) less salty or such?
I like it spread thin on hot toast with loads of butter. Or, fresh baked and still warm bread with loads of butter and Vegemite.
This tedious and relentless product placement is starting to bega belief.
By tossing it in the bin!🤨
White bread, lightly toast, real butter and take Vegemite jar and toss in bin. Enjoy delicious toast.
Toasted cheap white bread with equal amounts of butter and Vegemite, spread like Nutella
Since when is Vegemite only available at Woolworths? I understand that different stores have different products but does that me I wouldn't be able to buy it from like a corner store or IGA?..
Mmmm Yes
I’ve eaten it and loved it my whole life. According to that chart I’m a 4-6 enjoyer
Growing up, apparently our neigbour had it so thick, it'd be an 8 or 9 on this chart.  Hate to see his heart if he ever has an autopsy.
6 + avocado + *very* soft scrambled or poached eggs
> spoon it from the jar

Actually you just reminded me ... I used to stick a spoon in the jar, and then eat it by poking it with my finger and sucking my finger over the next hour.

Have not done that for many years.
>spoon it from the jar.

When I spoon it from the jar to use for cooking, I scrape what I can into the pan/pot/whatever from the spoon, then eat the rest straight up.
Also make the bread white.


Said as a person that never buys white bread.
Vegemite on toast also goes well with sliced tomato added.
You are a real one
😆

So not like with Nutella 😁

But, yeah, I heard you. Butter seems to be an important ingredient.
Hm
Smell, open jar....

Would it also work as some kind of insect repellent?
That sounds.... "Interesting".

Going to add to my meal plan for next week.
1. Fresh bread or toast is fine
2. Use lots of butter first
3. Only apply a thin scraping of vegemite.  No thick lumps anywhere, just a scraping of colour.  Start with maybe 1/4 teaspoon across a whole slice.  Over time you might increase to 1/2 teaspoon.

P.S. - see a coverage chart here: [https://www.couriermail.com.au/lifestyle/food/qld-taste/vegemite-on-toast-poll-how-much-is-too-much/news-story/afa0ac600c1388ceef3ccfeefb0b8658](https://www.couriermail.com.au/lifestyle/food/qld-taste/vegemite-on-toast-poll-how-much-is-too-much/news-story/afa0ac600c1388ceef3ccfeefb0b8658)

You should be aiming for a #1 or #2.  Most Aussies would aim around #4 or #5 but we've had a generation to aquire it.
Apply a thin layer of vegemite, add some sliced tomato, and thinly sliced cheese, and another slice of bread, toast the sandwich in a sandwich press. Or fry it in a pan. 

Think of vegemite as being like soy sauce. You don't want to use too much, but a little bit can add a lot of extra flavour.
**Hot** toast…

That's also important, it seems, based on the number of people that wrote that.
Thanks!
You're the first to say, that Vegemite should be spread thickly on the bread.

Well. I'll start with just a bit of it. Yesterday, I clearly had too much of it.
Its that size jar thats only available there
Yeah I'd be about a 4 most of the time, sometimes a 5 with lots of butter.
if i need a quick wake me up, a dessert spoon full straight will get those cheeks rosy as f! not for the light hearted.
true blue!
Absolutely not like Nutella. The trick with Vegemite is to spread it on and then scrape it off again so your have a thin film, not a thick covering. Lots of butter. Best with cooled toast!
Have never actually applied to the skin, but maybe the opposite! 
Yeah, 1 or 2 seems good. Me, I was more like a 5 and my son a 6. To be honest, we couldn't quite enjoy it.

Going to aim for 1 or 2.
That's a good point, it's gotta be hot and the butter soaking in.
Right, that’s how I enjoy it, definitely not for first timers though… sorry
A double butter 5 on a croissant is unbelievable
thanks.

gonna give it a try the way you described it.
Too bad we'll never find out.
OMG very few Aussies would even go for a #6.  That would have melted your son's face off.
Got it.

I did not have toast (but real bread *eg*). Will get toast and will make it hot and will make it soak in the butter.
All good :)
Vegemite is not for everyone, and that probably applies to some insects as well. The English would like you to try Marmite, they rate it.
Replace "would" with "did" 😆
Okay. Marmite. Now, how do I get a hold of that here in Switzerland?

Maybe I've got myself a reason to go to London again. Thanks, mate 😁
