Essentially 2 blokey blokes with names like Macca and Gromit. One being an ex contestant on a reality show and the other being an old footy player. Then the token female ‘keeping the boys in line’ or some crap. Usually an ex soap star. See images of exactly the same garbage.

Radio died when Club Veg broke up.
Yep, same formula. Hosts are NameY, NameO and The noun.
If you mean bland, boring, formulaic and dull, with the same selection of 56 songs constantly on repeat, then yes, exactly the same and equally shit
I mean yeah, it’s been a running joke for decades. Lav, Stab and Abby. Fitzy, Whipper, and whoever. Always the same number of syllables. Always 2 idiot, okker-sounding dudes in a competition to be the dumbest one, and a woman whose job is to constantly say “aww guyyyyys, jeeeez, you’re so crazy”. Commercial radio is shit, and JJJ has been gleefully following it down the rabbit hole for years.
Kyle and Jackie O are just two, but Kyle is cunty enough for two blokes. And Jackie O isn't a saint herself.
And the morons in commercial radio wonder why streaming services and Podcasts have taken off...
BOBBO, DAZZLER, AND THE GIRL
The format is called "morning zoo", and it's also used in North America

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morning\_zoo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morning_zoo)
Pretty much, they’re bloody boring. I always listen to what we call the granny station (community radio), much more interesting.
Comedian + sportsperson + reality/soap star 

What’s kinda crazy to me is that these folks are still raking in mega bucks to do this so presumably people are still listening? I don’t know a single person who listens to breakfast/drive radio in the age of Spotify/podcasts/audiobooks.
Commercial radio is aimed exclusively at the lowest common denominator. People often say 'Who the fuck listens to those two twats Kyle and Jackie O?' Just drive past a building site, is my response to that. 'You want it dumber and more skanky? Just listen to us.'
I genuinely don't understand how it survives as a format.  It's deader than free-to-air TV.  Every once in a while when my audio books/podcasts/spotify is (for whatever reason) not running, and that sort of nonsense is there, it reminds me just how bad it is.

Also, true fact: the girl's job is to laugh.

Women tend to laugh more readily than men in those sort of situations, so it's basically the job of the female presenter to let the audience know that whatever was just said was humorous, and that they should be entertained.  It helps if she's a bit hot (but not \*too\* hot, don't want to intimidate the mums) for the promo posters.
As an eavesdropping American I am dismayed that Australia has the same "two wacky dudes with silly nicknames and a gal who's not afraid to tell dirty jokes" formula that every FM morning show here has. Let me guess - they read top five lists off the internet directly into the microphone? They have segments like "stupid criminal of the day"? They have incredibly limited playlists such that there is a 20% chance you will hear *Edge of Seventeen* if you tune into "classic rock"?
This was why Hamish and Andy dominated the radio industry for so long. They were the only radio people that were even vagluelyt interesting
I may be naïve here but: do people still listen to the radio? 

I always thought the point was to listen to the music and you just put up with the crap in between and now there are other options to just listen to music.
Relevant Family Guy 
https://youtu.be/HzEgZt-R0gA
I have been driving in silence for many many years now. I absolutely can't stand to hear any of their voices. Utter bollocks. 


But oh hey it's Magpie swooping season, let's talk all about that......again. FUKEM !!!!!
Every major worldwide breakfast and drive shows are the same.  It's inane banter followed by loud guffaws.  They have a formula that appeals to the lowest common denominator.
Yes, Shit.
Yes and boring
And they are all the worst.
Yes. Thankfully there is PBS.
I think Hamish and Andy and Get This! have been the only things worth listening to on commercial radio for the last 25 years. Poor Ed Kavalee peaked his first two years in radio and it's been a never ending string of terrible shows ever since.
Only ones I could stand were Hamish and Andy. You can tell they really are best friends not just workmates and that they called their  slot "the people's show"and doubling down on it after being told not to was mint. People calling in always sounded like someone calling their mates and not someone calling in to a radio show.

Their podcast is still just as good, even better one might say
Why the fuck do they yap on about football all day on every channel? Nobody wants to hear about how hard mick used to kick a football, or how fast the other mong used to be able to run. I just turn it off whenever i hear it now.
And plays the same two songs from Taylor swift and sabrina carpenter and that other song about cowboy boots
‘Welcome back to Jock, Everyman and Housewife. This morning’s topic, are you a boxers or briefs guy? Although Everyman, I reckon you’re going commando right now.’  Hilarity ensues…

Fuck this shit
Community radio exists. Better music no ads and no annoying jerks.
They are all owned by the one company with the exception of Rebel 99.4 which has legitimately good music.
Unfortunately it is..and these fuck nuckels know shit about music!! Listen to quality non-commercial radio and you might learn something...
If you mean. Unfunny. Then yes they are
All shit? Yes, yes they are.
It's not that EDI has obviously skipped radio but the inane crap talk and OTT cackled that kill me. Morning crews are the worst for it. "And they gave me full cream instead of skim milk in my latte this morning.....arrggghh, hehehehehe, nahhhhh, yuk I almost threw uP", "HAAAAAAAAHAHAHAAHHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAA....NOOOO!!!! I can't even...." The orig internet meme types.  Make me look for rope and a high spot.
I remember the days I’d be driving to work and Hamish and Andy would have me in fits of laughter. Now I don’t even turn it on
Micko, Dicko and Clito
all australian commercial radio is absolute shit
I just fkn can’t stand Carrie Bickmore and Tommy little with a passion. I could avoid her on tv but now she’s on afternoon radio my god. It’s like Kramer when Mary hart comes on.
Kate, Tim & Marty was actually hilarious though. I don’t listen to FM radio, but I would always podcast KTM. It was a good laugh. But the actual production of the show was so dysfunctional. 

Marty didn’t get along with Nova management. Tim loves radio so much, but basic technological functions were never working. Kate and Marty never liked each other. Tim and Marty would always hang shit on Kate. Tim would hang up on callers if they were boring. Marty made it known how disinterested he was. Kate was going through personal problems in 2020 and was missing for half of the year. Marty lied about focussing on his stand up and left the show to have his own show on MMM and took 2 producers and an announcer from Nova with him. 

It was quite the ride.
Talk talk talk, some crappy song or two, talk talk talk, some stupid joke, a song or two, talk talk talk, an advert, talk talk talk... 

Turn off the radio, sound  of traffic is better than that crap...
They have been the same flavour of "generic, sort-of-funny, white guy" since the 1980s. It's so annoying. Even Home & Away has more flavour than Australian radio.
Yes. They’re made for the lowest common denominator. Without sounding elitist or better than the people that listen to this stuff….. Jesus it’s fucking shit 💩
Think about who still listens to radio and it should answer your question
The Christian O'Connell Show is where it's at
They are all fighting for the same reductive bogan audience. Not a brain cell to be found amongst any of them (including their audience). I switched to podcasts and streaming music many years ago.
Weenie and The Butt
The main guy, the goofy guy, and the "oh boys c'mon" girl.
All I can say is, the moment someone on the show is named Lachy I immediately turn it off.
The conversation, if you can even call it that is mind numbing.
I used to love fresh presenters but I can't listen to their generic waffling any more, their fake laughing at everything that doesn't warrant so much laughter makes me feel sick.
I just want music and no-one talking. I will even listen to the ads. I will buy things from them, even. Just shut the f\*\*k up and play music.
Who tf listens to this shit
Honestly a switch flicked in me when I bought a second hand cat and they had 89.9 The Light saved. 
Would I label myself as religious, no, but it’s a great change for my commute to work because it’s just a married couple being positive and peppy. It’s very rarely religious. 
Normally I listen to triple J or Nova. 
No, there's lots and lots of variety.  Sometimes there's one bloke and 1 woman.  And sometimes  two blokes and one woman.  Sometimes, there are two blokes.  And sometimes 3 blokes.  And sometimes they talk about how they saw something funny at the shops and get people to ring in and talk about the funny things they've seen at a shop.  And sometimes they talk about a funny thing they saw while driving and get people to call in and talk about the funny things they've seen while driving.  The variety is endless.
It's the same in my home country too (Ireland). Three generic white people trying too hard to be funny playing the same 10 songs on a loop.
"One being an ex contestant on a reality show and the other being an old footy player."

I find this hilarious, becuase Fitzy is both hahahaha
Sally Fletcher was better with Pippa and Tom
Absolutly. Why try to be different when you can be as unimaginative as the rest.
I actually found that Kate, Tim & Marty were pretty funny. Didn’t find the others as good though.
Are Marty Sheargold and Tim Blackwell still mates? They had such good chemistry.
Radio died when Martin/Molloy broke up in the 90s. 😭
Imagine letting any of these absolute wasters occupy a single second of your brain space lmao.
Commercial radio? What's that?
The rabbit hole goes deeper than you imagine -> https://www.abc.net.au/mediawatch/episodes/radio/103961062
You mean shit? yes
It's telling that with hundreds of comments in agreement and nobody defending the format that it's even a thing. How is something so clearly unpopular... popular?
You mean shit? Yes
Don't you dare talk about Flappo and Wippa like that!

Bonzo and Glippa are hilarious!

I especially love how they laugh at all of their own jokes, and hold nonstop call-in competitions instead of playing music!
40 year old hosts acting like they're 20
I miss Hamish and Andy…
Probably showing my age here, but the ONLY radio 'talk-show' that was EVER any good was "Martin-Molloy" many years ago (on Fox-FM, I can't recall?)... Genuinely funny and talented, unlike the vacuous air-heads that spout their endless, unfunny shite these days...
[they’re all the same, when one or two companies own all forms of communication.](https://youtu.be/ksb3KD6DfSI?si=yFEfQxVwPORT-mca)
The funniest thing I have ever heard on the radio was in Armidale, NSW a number of years ago.  

I was travelling for work and was driving out early and the local station had obviously set this up but the young DJ crossed to "Ben" a local farmers son for a early morning traffic report from his families helicopter.  It sounded like Ben had actually taken off in the chopper and his report was as follows:  "Mornin', I can see one traffic down there, but it all looks to be flowing pretty well."

It was delivered in such a deadpan way it was truly hilarious.
People complaining about song rotation nowadays.

Clears throat, checks for onion on the belt...

Back in the 80s, there was this English fella called Phil......and no streaming services to turn to.

But yeah, radio is 💩
Great take to be fair. But fuck knows what kind of person still listens to AM/FM ‘drive time’ radio anymore when Spotify exists.
Lol
Haven't listened broadcast radio in a long time, probably never will either because it is just terrible annoying noise. 

You know, like free to air TV - not doing that either
Yup and they’re all dogshit
“Never more than two ads in a row” *Plays two ads*

That’s three ads!
Dog turds on antennas, old saying from the car yard days....if a yard hanged dog turds on antennas and they sold lots of cars, other yards would copy....
jubjub fuckknuckle and marge for your drive home
Fuck the radio 
Yep and they all play the same 20 songs on repeat.
I have no idea how I ended up here, I’ve never even been to Australia, but American FM radio shows do the same shit.
I’m glad Hughesy got pulled this week… I used to like him but listening to him on radio every day made me despise him. He’s turned into a guy that name drops all his big Hollywood friends and it’s just so cringey listening to it…
All a bunch of twats that continuously think they’re funny.
FM radio shows tend to be a couple of sexist/racist men and a woman tolerating their nastiness.
The radio is the bane of my existence. I have never once chosen to listen to that crap but it's on 24/7 at my job with no way to drown it out just hours of 2 super annoying host followed by 3 Taylor Swift songs back to back with whatever is popular on tiktok right now sprinkled in then back to the annoying hosts and then the worlds most annoying ads back to Taylor Swift. It's actual mental torture. I would rather sit in complete silence.
The Marty Sheargold one is the only one I ever hear, and it is funny. Top 3 at 3

I have no idea who the other 2 people on the show are, or any of the others pictured
Ah, radio. How quaint.
Macca and Gromit were so good on Triple J, but then they went commercial and fucked it all up.
I guess, but who's even listening these days?
It’s oddly ironic that some of these pics are over five years old. Sheargold left Nova ages ago and Byron Cooke left Fox breakfast in about 2021
I mean, this isn't a recent thing. It's been this way for years. Back when I was in highschool in Brisbane there was Jamie, Penny and Deano (as well as Donna Lynch and Ian Skippen) so 2 guys 1 girl has been a format that's 20+ years old at this point.
They’re all just background noise and honestly don’t bother me, it’s all the same shit from different mouths. But Robin on 973 can go fuck a cactus. What a horrible human being she is.
I haven't listened to commercial radio since 1991.  
(whisper): Triple M.  
  
Then it was JJJ til about 1994.  
RRR from 2001 to 2007.  
Occasionally RRR/PBS now.

I avoid add in TV by:  
switching channels  
pre-recording and skipping

Radio only offers switching channels. Plus most of them are lame anyway. So that makes it easy not to listen.
Good God I fucking hate the radio lmao
Listening to triple m at work is pure torture. Listening to daisy will and fucking Rosie go on and on and on about the fucking olympics. Jesus. Without the Olympics they’d literally be out of the job, surely.

I miss marty. He was actually funny sometimes unlike will.
Just like every news anchor, weathergirl, idol host, politician etc etc,  all carefully curated for the masses.
Bring back Matlock!
You mean Rubbish….Yes!
Yeah because they’re all nova radio stations (or some shit like that). Of course they’re all going to follow the same format
They all look like cut rate porn threesomes.
Wouldn't know. Haven't listened to the tripe since I first got a CD player in my car in 2003 and have no idea why anyone would.
All shit, commercial radio and tv should die
I’ll be honest, I haven’t turned on a radio in years
Do you mean over paid morons who don’t have any talent. Then it a big fat yes
Most of the shows you've posted here do not exist any more haha
Yes. They all suck
All they need is a Pizza Place...
Similar to commercial fta tv, I don’t know how this is still a thing.
Once you realise this it's time to stop listening
No different here. Boring as fuck.
Remember when that was cool? Now it’s cringe. Fake laughs, fake people.
Now they've exported those fucking Twats Kunty and Cocky O to Melbourne... Yes. Yes they are.

Here's hoping Melbourne radio is the death of these two useless, horrible people.
In a streaming world I’m genuinely surprised people look forward to morning radio. Opting for that rubbish and the plethora of ads is insane.
It's because these shows are owned by iHeartMedia
Yes
Yes. The real bottom of the barrel though is Kyle and Jackie O, Dave Hughes or most especially Carrie Bickmore.
Same in NZ too
Yes. It tested positive in the focus group. The safest team composition for the masses to ingest.
I find FM radio to be brain numbing in general, I don't really listen to anything it's just background noise.
If you watch media watch often enough, you'll often see them called out for using exactly the same scripted content.

Someone from, say, Hornsby wins a holiday then every local station replays the phone conversation with different announcers but the same winner.

Glenda from Hornsby

Hannah from Waverley

Brenda from Charnwood

Mary from Frankston...  Etcetera

So everyone thinks there was a local winner, but really there was only one for the whole nation.

Also kyle & Jackie are in Melbourne too now.
Yes. Welcome to the commercialisation of art, music, and comedy where men in suits with business and marketing degrees call the shots and appeal to the lowest common denominator and it's all about advertising revenue and playing it safe. This is what you get if you let a computer and a board meeting determin art and media.
Uh huh. Yes, it is a proprietary programming format that originated in the US. I believe the stations either pay some kind of royalty or buy it outright.  
It is micro-programmed down to the minute.   
Others have already mentioned it - usually two male and one female.  
Personalities are assigned. Often the male announcers play slightly dim and the female announcer is smart and sassy.  
Advertisements run for a specified time per hour, same with music, down to the second.  
Specific time is set aside for the entertainment. e.g. a "game" segment like guess the sound, crank calls.  
Specific time for the endearing personal story, usually something inane like one of their kids mispronouncing a word at which all three must laugh hysterically.   
Then cut to a fun interview with another personality promoting something, lots of jokes and forced laughter throughout.  Then some very light weight current affairs, don't talk about anything serious! Then news headlines and weather and traffic snarls. Make pithy comments to the newsreader and weather reporter.  
You get the idea. The producers have a big folder of tried and true topics they can get the announcers to work with.  
It's all been scientifically honed for decades...
Yes.

And conchetta charisto has a great future in commercial radio


She has exactly that annoying squealy tone and over excited about everything
Hate all the hosts on the radio, except Susie O'Neil. I'll listen if she's on and I happen to be clicking channel.
Yes totally agree....podcasts however, I won't hear a bad word about Ryan John, 10/10 would suck his dick and I've always said that
Ryan from the Toni and Ryan podcast (last photo, guy with beard) is actually hilarious though!
Don't forget all the pointless competitions where they give away x amount of money to whoever they call or who could guess a 'code word' and they won't shut up about it for months on end
Radio died when Love Song Dedications ended.
I assume they prefer two dicks and a pair of tits because it creates some balance in airtime, male presenters are expected to be funny and entertaining while the woman anchors the show.


Professional stand up comedians maybe write a minute or two of quality material weekly, trying to fill even a one hour radio show daily with high quality material would take a huge team.
I'm told by a mate in the media that commercial radio is an absolutely *brutal* market and the hosts are under enormous pressure to get good ratings in comparison to the other stations or they're out on their ass.

This has resulted in everyone basically having a "Steve-O, Maddie and The Spazz" line-up because that is, apparently, what people who respond to radio listening surveys like listening to in the mornings.

Like everyone else says: Community radio is where it's at. There's some legitimately good stuff there, and not in a weird "I was into Czech Phonk before it was cool" way.
Can’t stand all the bullshit on those radio stations anymore, they laugh at their own stories far too much and play the same songs every day
Zebra dog and the alpha chimp here! We’re giving away fifty bucks in cold hard cash every hour on the no repeat work day! Speaking of cold, here is the chisel again for another hour of power!
Interspersed with 300 Harvey Norman ads after each song of course!
Two words: Get This
Dude, funny Guy and Woman.
Yes 😆
I mean, that isn’t even fifi box’s current cohosts, but who would know?
The Devils Threesome.
Yes because if you have 2 women then men complain that they talk too much.
To be fair most people aren't exactly unique in their opinions and thoughts, it makes sense to pander to the majority.
Two guys, a girl and a radio show
Wheeny and the butt
I stopped listening to commercial radio when we were all home during COVID and haven't felt the need to go back to it. Audio books for me these days.
My car just sits on smoothfm, simple old tracks and the news every half hour at peak time. Cant go wrong.
For capital cities, the format is generally:

1 x male comedian or ex-athlete
1x bubbly female, usually with some experience in reality TV
1x male anchor who keeps things on track

In regional areas its:
1 x male who is a radio nerd and loves Kyle Sandilands and/or John Laws
1 x bubbly female who has submitted applications to reality shows and hasn't got the call up
Ray-dee-oh you say….   I’ve seen the billboards.. now I know what it’s about.
Yes
Dunno, never understood why people enjoy listening to random nobodies discussing things they have no idea or qualifications, when it comes to real serious shit. Play some shitty music and stfu
Who the fuck still listens to radio? Ever?
I stopped listening to commercial radio when Merrick and Rosso parted ways
granted, Have You Been Paying Attention isn't the pinnacle of live comedy, but thank GOD they have actual comedians over the radio personalities nowadays
Yep, simple formula, eye candy in the middle and a couple of door knobs by her side.
Yep, they’re all extra shit!
Same in America, thank God we've moved beyond radio. Audiobooks for the win!!
As an American I recognize Ryan from Toni and Ryan in the last picture but am confused at the presence of two non Tonis.
I’d rather eat my own shit than listen to any of these.
This is your daily brain damage arvo with Jacko, Cracko & Whacko.
Radio is dead ,  commercial producers are too blame
Yep and most are shit. Don't mind Wsrm Jones and Amanda or Abc. Fuck. I'm 50.
Same here.  A dimwit who laughs at everything.   Like Jimmy Fallon.
Yes, they all suck.
Did you make “Macca and Gromit” up? Because that’s the best example I’ve heard in my life. That’s what there always are.
Same here in Germany. Is every contemporary music station on this planet just invalid, uncreative sludge?
I think kyle sanderland couldn't find another guy to work with him, it's just him and the woman? I've only seen the billboards so I only vaguely know what I'm taking about

(Apologies for not knowing the co host name)
Shit Commercial radio? Yes, and Canadian, too.
Same in ireland. Carl, doireann and donnacha. Donnacha is a former rugby player. Doireann is a radio personality and Carl is a comedian
It's the exact same shit here in the USA for drivetime radio. Makes Casey Kasem (which they still play!) look progressive.
As someone who spends 14 hours confined to a truck cab I hate radio with a passion.. there are only soo many times in a week I can hear the same hand full of hosts tell me this a smash new hit being played for the first time ever this week.. (it's been played 10 times and it's only Tuesday) .. and the "hot" new track is swiftie sing whinging about how this boy was different for the first five days then she became insufferable and it's his fault for not doing the right thing... silent drives are the only thing maintaining my sanity..
Endless adverts, superficial news, fake hosts blabbing about rubbish? Yes.
Story telling guy, laughing guy, shocked and appalled woman! Same setup all over the world.
Little fella from the UK here.

Holy shit, it's exactly the same where I live.
Call now and win some cash on the rock triple play, no repeat work day, mates multi.
Australian radio is stuck in 2000's. Using the outdated format of 2 guys and a girl, never talking about anything controversial or interesting. The second I hear the inane banter I switch to a station with music and that's only if I didn't bother using bluetooth.

TL;DR Australian radio stinks.
Tim, Brad and Kelly
Jocko, Smelly and Jason
Tim, Marty and Shauno
Michelle, Kim and Wakka.


All the bloody same. 
Two shrimps and a Barbie?
Quirky Bloke, Blokey Bloke and The Sheila
"Oh....you guys.....that's a crazy thing to say!"


We have this in the US too.
Birdie, Grimace and The Hamburglar sounds like the hosts of a commercial radio station. Traffic report with the Hamburglar There’s a 5 way pileup on the gateway motorway outbound huge delays. Traffic bumper to bumper and slowed to a crawl. If you’re in a rush for breaky it’s crunch time with the new eggs Benny crunch Mcwrap. I’ll be back next hour with the Hamburglars traffic report on 101.5 MacFM
Never really thought about this or cared before but radio really is the whitest media in Australia. I’m not saying non-white hosts would necessarily be funnier but it’s weird there are none.
Yeah, they’re all fucking dogshit
Queue over the top fake laughter after every single comment
It's terrible. Just play cool music. Maybe some news breaks.
In the industry it’s called the spit-roast approach.
As it’s been called by many a radio consultant, this concept is “the dick, the dear and the dork”.
The Big Bang theory but in radio
Not Australian but this type of crap is why I stopped listenning to radio altogether.  Cannot stand it.
Do you mean shit? Yes. 
American Here. I have no idea who any of these people are...

But looks like every group is Socially Attractive Dude, Funny Best Friend, and The Hot One.

And the names are probably Mike, Trish, and The Mad Dog or some combo of ManNameA, ChickName A, Wild Adjective-Noun.

They have shows where ManNameA brings up inappropriate topic, ChickNameA eyerolls/sighs and tries to logic the situation, and Adjective-Noun just shouts "TITS AMIRITE?!"

How'd I do?
All owned by the same company
Full of 'bubbly' narcissists with their fake laughs.

Yep, pretty much.
>Then the token female ‘keeping the boys in line’ or some crap.

Who gets offended by pretty much half of what the guys say about female stereotypes, but hypocritically says the same shit about male stereotypes.
That one guy has a hat, and that first lady has brown hair... totally different
It's the same format in the U.S. as well. I read back in the 90's that the 2 guy, 1 woman personality format was based off a radio station in the NYC area that did extremely well. The one douche guy, the nice guy, and the woman that goes either way, but with an animated, sometimes raspy voice. We've been had.
Its the same in America too.  Two dudes who think they are funny and a woman to fake laugh at them.  A local morning show that does not follow that formula refers to the generic host line up as "Jojo and the Monkey Boy"
Eric Bana had his own sketch show after full frontal finished and he had a “smooth radio dj“ sketch that absolutely murdered this exact crappy formula everyone is ragging on (rightly so may i add). Dave o’neil was in it as well. This was some 20 years ago and it is still so on point.
Definitely got that whiteness
*Crazy Ira and The Douche*
This sounds like a Tony Martin bit.
Woah, cool ya jets. I think The Noun is a great bloke and plenty funny.  As for NameO... what an absolute tool!
Jamey

Davo

The Blob
Roo, Ditz and Loz

Amazingly Triple M Adelaide didn't name the women Ditz
Lamey,  lame-o and the clown
I believe the correct spelling is “Namesy”
And they always have the craziest things happening to them at the supermarket, gym, Bunnings, the traffic lights. They must be drama magnets, they definitely don't steal their stories from social media.
Same shit music too.
Coming up after these messages, battle of the sexes!
I also like that diversity quotas go out the window when they know you can't see their faces. 

"Ha!! Holy shit, how good is this? We don't have to hire any blacks or Asians like we always wanted!!"

It's the conservative's safe space
Dingo and the baby!
I actually lolled.
I have a little word game going in my head thinking of new potential combos: flippsy, dicko & whopper. Meg, flabby and porthole. Wingnut, Polly and the Sausage
Smart Arse, Straight Guy, and The Sheila.
Fitzy, Whippet and the donk!
In the 2000's when I was at Uni I worked full-time across the xmas / new year period with the radio on in the background.  Triple M had a "no repeat work work day", but I am 99% sure they repeated the exact same playlist every single day.
30% AC/DC by volume.
That's not the worst part. The presenters are so stupid and annoying makes me want to bang my head against a wall.
But have you ever heard a poll asking if you scrunch or fold your TP? Over or under? Hmm 🤔/s
They've had TripleM on at my work for years, and i've lost count how many times I've heard those same rock songs over and over. 
It's like that in the States. I didn't realize "classic rock" consisted of the same 4 dozen songs over and over and over.
Boring?????? Don't you know all of the jokes are EXTREMELY FUNNY HAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA [insert most bogan laugh ever]
There were some people in Canberra advertising their crappy commercial radio station as "Canberra's widest range of music" I pointed out to them that they were standing literally 30 seconds walk from 2XX studios - guys, you really wanna test that claim? (at the time I was doing the experimental music show, which came between the goth show and the latin american music show)
Hey, it's 112 songs now! (actually you're not too far off the mark for one station at least lol)
We're taking calls today about how much bloody Vegemite you put on ya bloody toast!
What I don’t get is there’s probably plenty of radio talent out there, but the prime spots are given to guys like Brendan Fevola.
And bogans fucking lap it up.
Also the blokes are always pretty average while the woman has to be at least mildly fuckable by the listening demographic. She also can't be that funny - that's Dicko and Cocksey's job.
My SO is not Australian, and I was trying to explain how MMM's breakfast radio by Marty Sheargold had a call in nearly every day about when you cut off a digit/limb, impaled yourself, or broke a bone/s.

So she started calling it "Accident Radio" lmao.
I've never changed from triple J but I'm definatley at the age where AM is sounding like a better option, or maybe when I can afford a car with a digital radio I'll have more choice, double j maybe?
[Oh Howard, you crazy for this one](https://youtu.be/y_EbkbNc-KM?si=VY6DtNFb7zROuvnc&t=2m15s)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_J14SvWKMGU
Ahh triple J, the home of the nasally, annoying male presenter
Hobba & Hing was peak drive-home radio
I don’t understand how they still have a big following. But then I realise that average intelligence is actually quite low.
Now totally failing to conquer Melbs.
I listened to it for 20 minutes in an Uber. Was curious about why people hated it so much. My god, it's somehow far, far worse than I could have imagined. 

Just Kyle sexualizing callers and asking weird questions the entire time.
I’m amazed they still think he is worth his salary tbh. Shock jock ain’t so shock when everything he says is just countering the general consensus. Anti guy is anti-ing wow big surprise.
Did you know they recently got a 10-year, $200 million contract?
>And Jackie O isn't a saint herself.

She is as big of a bastard as Vile is. The two were made for each other.
A show performed by halfwits for the entertainment of the drooling lower-witted.
I loved seeing them bitch and moan about "bad treatment" when Frenzel Rhomb got sick of Jackie's shit and just started playing over the top of her at some festival in Darwin... Kyle was going to "ruin their careers" 

A bigger pair of fuckwits I've never seen..
“Oh Kyle you naughty hah hah oh dear I shouldn’t laugh, hey seen my pay rise? Let’s do another round!”
I refer to them as Cunt And Cunt. Fuck those two thrice. They’re everything that’s wrong with Australia.
well that's 3 cunts , so it checks out.
I remember being 15/16 and listening to Jackie and Ugly Phil every night. I still remember listening in horror to them calling one of the girls who’d got a 100 on her TER and telling her there’d been a mistake and it was actually a lower number. She was sobbing on the radio and begging them to tell her it was a joke. They kept going. And Ugly Phil got sacked in the outrage and she got off Scot freee. 

And she’s been encouraging Kyle in every disgusting thing he’s done. She’s an utter Cunt.
I find it hilarious now how radio has ads advertising the benefits of advertising on radio. Like come on guys, if it was that useful in modern days it’d be used more. Like those billboard that just start as “your ad here”, its most likely empty for a reason - no one’s bothers to look at it, its in the wrong spot to be noticed, or it isn’t worth the cost of putting an ad there
because all we really want is for them to STFU and play the next song.
Nah man, this is *all* [IHeartRadio](https://www.iheart.com/). Radio is what podcasts are. Podcasts are and were mp3s of radio shows. *With commercials*.

And streaming hasn't made any money, it's just a thing that's still happening. People do and don't do streaming. Live radio still beats the shit out of other media, particularly the community stations in Australia. Sounds great, if the station sounds a bit quieter than the other stations then grab your amplifier and listen to it properly. If you're doing DAB+, that's fine, but you might as well be listening to Youtube audio or the radio station's website. FM, with a good amount of dynamic range, *pumps*. Unpaid volunteers in Australia make masterpiece shows everyday on FM.
Dicko, Cocksey and NiceTits
Yeah iHeartRadio has a billion Morning Zoo shows spread out throughout the USA. Mostly on their Z100-106 stations.
I volunteered for a week at a community radio station in my area and it genuinely was one of the most pleasant experiences ever. I waltzed on in there and they put me straight on air we would discuss topics during song times related to news/politics/music so we had stuff to say we would speak for like 3 mins and then play 15 mins worth of ad breaks. One of my favourite parts is the comments the lady who runs it makes about the adds when they played. Once I was on what I called the muso show and we played the end of the world by Gary morre and a guy called in to compliment us on the music.
To answer your question: Old people exist in larger numbers than ever before.
I think a lot of businesses still use the radio. The warehouse I'm in has 2-3 radios going every day. We're not allowed to have our own speakers or headphones for safety so instead we're forced to listen to the shit they call radio.
Car radio is the only thing keeping it alive
Building sites and warehouses. My old workplace has this shite on all day.
we bloody invented it smh
Actual hilarious people who enjoyed hanging out and working with eachother, I loved listening to their archives as someone who wasn't Australian
I dunno, "Get this" with Tony martin and Ed kavalee was pretty damn funny.

Although they were also completely different from anything I've ever heard, before or since.  They had been pantomime segments, and their Nissan navata shout out always had a commentary about how the navata was taking out the local duck pond.  

Here's a small section of why [it was so fucking good](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Get_This)

Martin and Kavalee have discussed often that April 2007 be redesignated as "Capril" (a portmanteau of the words Cape and April), a month where all listeners should wear capes in public, conducting day to day activities. The tagline for the month was: "Are you capable?".[5] This activity has continued since the show's cancellation as an awareness and fundraising activity for depression, which claimed the life of panel operator Richard Marsland.

Martin shouting "Oooh me plums!" whenever injured testicles are mentioned on the show, usually followed by a comedic 'boing'.

Greg Fleet's running gag "Jumper-pants" (wearing a jumper like you would pants) has even found itself a theme song (Turn your smile into a frown, turn your wardrobe up-side down, JUMPERPANTS!).

Segue into songs. Martin will often ask Marsland a question, with the answer being the opening lyric of the song. Many songs are introduced as if being played live (typically on multiple instruments at once) by Kavalee.

The team called the month of August "Borgust" and encouraged listeners to send in photos of themselves dressed (as poorly as possible) like the Borg from Star Trek.
Yes, community radio. Many of them play a whole lot of actual music instead of acting like dickheads
Sometimes I’ll throw on community radio or use an app to listen to PBS or 4ZZZ etc.
Yes.  In a workplace where you can't really wear headphones but want some music, radio is the only real option.
Try double J - on the ABC app or digital radio. Highly recommend for music and hosts.
I much prefer to have someone else choose the songs. The algorithm did it relatively well for a while (particularly Pandora when that was around), but now it sucks. Luckily PBS and RRR exist, and if usually if the show currently playing on one of them is too talky or not my style of music, then the other is usually A-OK. Biggest problem is when there's a killer show on both (such as Friday evening)
Radio is just background noise for places where you have to wait.
Independent community radio is where it's at. RTRFM in Perth is mostly volunteer presenters on air who actually know music and produce great shows about music


Not about dudes ringing in to talk about their mates taking a shit or whatever it is over there.
I don’t understand it either, I get in my car , plug in the phone and just listen to my own music selection.

Haven’t listened to radio for 25 years and I worked at a huge radio broadcaster for 9 of those
DINGO AND THE BABY
I agree. It’s absolute asinine garbage.
Not to mention the click bait garbage they carry on about. I'm no prude, but hearing how one of the hosts had to wax and not shave her bits for a date on the weekend to impress some guy. It's 8.30am and the kids are going to school, it can't be a normal radio thing right? Maybe It's getting worse or am I just getting old? 
Get This! would have still been going, if it wasn't for the thugs from the scallop industry.
I love Hamish and Andy they feel like everything right that these idiots are failing to do. My favourite thing they did recently was by far the hat prank just a stupid and absurd silly thing fun thing nothing more nothing less
Ed Kavalee is genuinely pointless, all he wants to talk about is his kids books
Dasha, "Austin (Boots Stop Workin')"?
>no ads and no annoying jerks.

Well we want out community stations to be able to plug their occasional "brought to you by" beer company or events companies, but yeah we don't want it go the way of SBS. 

*But* there's also a lot of 3AW style jerks in community radio. LiteFM is community radio.

Sort of the entire concept of just throwing kids on air without pay and a few weeks training (for a few hundred dollars, but the community stations will take you if you've trained at one of the others, *but you might need to be a paid subscriber* to get on air) is a bit jerky. But that whole concept is why we get to hear real Australian voices on the radio. They have boards with board members, these stations, they're not for profit, and the not for profit sector always should be looked at for their financial and cultural intent. They're using wealth "not for profit", and so the profit is the work itself. 

All that said, I very much love Australia's community radio stations *and* the commerical ones. They all barely exist. It's funny and beautiful to still hear the Rage 1987 Iggy Pop remix theme alongside the Triple M "Rocks" angel theme in 2024. Barely exist, these things.
That's what pisses me off the most. In the nineties there was some kind of big radio spectrum sale in Victoria and there was some condition that community stations would get some of the pie. The reality was each station got a 6 month trial and never got renewed. The trial gave us Kix, Kiss FM, Gay FM all with excellent music including EDM. Naturally the govt worked overtime to fuck them all over and keep big media happy.
They aren't supposed to know anything about music, they are in drive time slots and entertain between the songs.
Tim hanging up on long winded callers always cracked me up. Kate never gelled with Tim and Marty but maybe that was part of the shtick. She always just came across as tightly wound.
Yeh I kinda stumbled upon KTM, then only listened to the podcast. It was kinda of a piss take of the typical FM drive show, it was actually great. Tim chatting about Aussie bands he goes to see that Nova doesn't play, taking the piss about phoners and news stories like biggest rat in China  


edit: and they didn't do interviews/guests outside of the quick draw game, which is pretty great when every other commercial show has whoever was voted out of whatever reality show on that week


 Joel joining kind of lost the magic, he's fine, but is too similar to Tim, don't know about Ricki-Lee. So it kinda dropped off my radar, it's way down on my podcast list
Yeah the post uses them as the first picture when a) the show name was literally just their names and b) there was no ex-reality contestant NOR footy player on the team lol.
You've got the timing exactly right.


The format was pioneered by Paul Thompson on SA-FM in the 1980s. They flogged it worldwide.
Facts .
100% the only station I listen to now. The music is a bit repetitive but the hosts are great.
He's such a good host. I'm pretty sure the co- host Jack  used to work with Hamish and Andy back in the day too
You don’t need  commercial radio for that, there’s countless streaming services
How come my cats didn’t come with any pre-tuned radio content? One in particular could really use tuning to fix the screeching.
I left Ireland 21 years ago. Back then the trend of two presenters was just starting to happen. I ended up listening to the stations with single DJs, namely sticking to 2fm (Gerry Ryan, Ryan Tubridy (he was popular back then) et al.  When I landed on Oz I couldn't handle the inane commercial radio, the product endorsements. Don't get me wrong,  I'm a sucker for pointing out product placements in movies etc, but listening to presenter reading scripts about ANZ bank or Horny Goat Weed was difficult. The trend is even now trickling into the ABC, with two presenters mid afternoon (but no endorsements allowed thankfully). I've started tuning in to Radio 2 on the BBC the last few years, the last bastion of single DJs. Oh, and Alan Partridge. AHAH.
It's noise with ads in.
Dunno if you take taxis or rideshares often but it's that noise you sometimes hear when you get in their car. Luckily pretty easy to diagnose and fix unlike a lot of unexpected noises cars make!
Because just like reddit as a whole, this is just a vocal minority, an echo chamber of like minded individuals. Reddit embodies a *very* small section of the general public.
Those are actual people? I thought OP made the names up to exaggerate their point.
Maaaaaatlooock!!
I understood that reference
*air horn*

*boiiing*
Are you saying we live in DoucheNation?
Knackers and The Vag
Me so horny!
r/unexpectedpawnee
**DINGO AND THE BABY**
Pawnee: Home of the Stick Up Leslie Knope's Butt
I miss Martin Molloy
[Crackers and the Tugboat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8eJH8ogxUl4)
Oy! NameO tells it like it is!
Does NameY  laugh at The Noun's baudy jokes, in spite of herself?  I'm from America, this show sounds revolutionary
Chas, Fudgo and Big Boy
Izzy, Chaz-o and The Mad Cunt.
I worked in a place that did the same 
They repeated it almost exactly the same (songs) over the week.
Just the news and yapping in between was different
Yeah they still have it. Been doing some mulching the last few weeks, with radio in the headphones. It's all 80's, 90's, 00's songs. But it's kind of expected when their userbase is Gen X and Millenials, because the boomers are watching some dogshit on TV, and the zoomers have their music devices. And I can't handle any other stations because of Taylor Swift, Justin Bieber, and all the dogshit pop between.
Don't forget the Foo Fighters every hour! And I actually like the Fooeys but its the repetitiveness that makes you start loathing their biggest hits.
I expect to be carried out in a box to AC/DC when the time comes, but I absolutely do not need to hear the same three songs every week, thank you very much.

PSA Spotify has a pretty good range of hard rock and heavy metal.
That's AD/DC if you listened to club veg!
The kind of hard-hitting journalism that the lamestream media would never publish. ABC are too scared of offending their folder-biased base to even touch this topic.
I called into Triple J to answer this when I was a kid (about 13 - 1994ish) “Me and my Mum are scrunchers and Dad is a folder!”
Kid at school heard it and started calling me “Scrunchaaaa!”
You were probably listening on a Double Shot Tuesday
We laugh but guaranteed that's been a call in topic along with these:

- "Talking to my mate at the footy club, and we were talking; how much weatbix do you do?"

- "Yeah so went out to the movies on a date this weekend and it was a bit of a disaster. Callers what's your first date disaster? Taking calls after Take Me Out by Franz Ferdinand"

- "A mate of mine and his work mate are going camping on the weekend. They literally only hang out at work but are taking their relationship to the next level. Victoria, what's a work relationship you took to the next level?"

- "We've been talking around the office about a certain ex-prime minister that had a bit of a bathroom blunder at a Maccas'. Perth, where was your bathroom blunder?"

I could probably think of more, but those are the least creative ones (and ones I guaranteed happened multiple times) that I can think of.
[deleted]
This is the format that sells for mainstream Australia, or is at least tolerable. Most of the people who actively dislike this format are probably either listening to Triple J or mostly podcasts and online music streaming rather than traditional FM radio.
I don't hate Brendan  Fevola, but is he the dumbest person in radio? Just a big ol  dumb dumb
and are there to say thinks like "aw come on you can't say that Cocksey! That's not very POI COI is it?!"
Double J is great. Don’t love Dylan Lewis but he’s growing on me, the rest of the onair talent is fine. A lot better than anything commercial.
Sounds weird, but Classic FM is actually not too bad. It's definitely because I'm getting older, but also just more relaxing in traffic. 

Also the game show is fucking awesome.
Community radio is where it is at. 

Which if you're in Melb , PBS and RRR are at the top of the list.
JJJ has sucked the skin off lemons for years.....DAB has a few better options....like Sky Racing hahahaa
Hideously annoying women presenters too. Thinking they're being edgy and cool but really they are boring and basic af.
I genuinely can’t listen to them. I’m their age and they sound geriatric, like they’ve got seniors cards (no offence to older Redditors), which baffles me because it makes me self conscious into thinking am I that old??
Think of how stupid the average person is, and realize half of them are stupider than that.

George Carlin
It gives me the jollies to see that they're tanking in Melbourne. It means there are still some out there who can't stand scandal over quality. 

Sydney continues to let down the country in that regard.
The number of people listening to radio drops every year. So although they rate high, I suspect the actual number of people listening to them is dropping.
I’ve never been more proud of my state every time their ratings come out in Melbourne and they continue to die a slow, painful death
It’s not that they have a big following. They have powerful friends in the industry.
Thank christ
Kyle sounds like a bad parody of a Ricky Gervais character, it's all bad crude jokes that don't land and making other people uncomfortable while bragging about his own success.
Yeah I read about it in The Book of Revelations
Shame on those that listen to them....clowns cashing in.
Problem is, she looks sane next to Vile.
She did Ugly Phil dirty.
Quarterwits 
C'mon. Post the link

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5EJkJi\_yHHE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5EJkJi_yHHE)
As soon as a medium is advertising on how it's good to advertise with them, it's in a death spiral. "Radio is great for blahblah."

"Advertise on this billboard!"
But you're talking about it.

Thanks the threshold for what advertisers want.
Streaming hasn't made any money? What are you smoking? It's made billions.
Wankboy, Knobhead and Women
And Canada. It is the absolute most boring, repetitive shit. Oh, your radio station is rock? Well I'm going to place a bet and say you play the exact same music as every single one of the rock radio stations across Canada. The standard 3: rock, country, and top 40 hits. I'm genuinely baffled too that, while the latter two change it up when new music comes along, rock is still playing the same songs as it played IN THE 90s. AC/DC is to us what Perry Como is to the 90s, and frankly I'd rather listen to Perry.
That’s true and the ratings seem to indicate that with a heavy preference towards AM/Smooth/Gold etc (which generally don’t follow this host formula). 

[radio ratings](https://radiotoday.com.au/ratings-results-for-survey-4-2024-out-this-morning-from-9-30am/)
I recently went from a position where I could use headphones and listen to my own music to a place where we can only have the radio on. Needless to say, I want to pull my eyeballs out listening to that shit everyday.
I usually wear headphone when I'm working, but having the radio on ABC when the cricket is on is kinda awesome.

Like, you know summer is here kinda feel.
I followed them to their podcast, as I'm sure many did. No news, no politics, nothing inappropriate, no crazy fans screaming down the phone for money, minimal prank calls... From radio to podcast they have my utmost respect for their ability to consistently deliver simple and hilarious content.
This is also a great example of content becoming popular in spite of Austereo, not because of them. Most good ideas were seemingly created by great minds (like Martin and Kavalee / Hamish & Andy) rather than because of the radio industry itself. This creates a problem because Austereo has no idea how to make good content, doesn't really have any original ideas and therefore doesn't value it properly
Go the Zeds! 50 years young next year.
4ZZZ forever <3
does no one in the workplace hook up spotify?
It makes you wonder who they think their audience is, and do they think people want to hear their damned drivel. 

Bloody embarrassing is what it is.
We have the radio playing at the petrol station I work at, so I have to listen to this rubbish for hours every day. All they do is talk about sex (clearly just for shock value and ratings). It's mind numbing
The "ratings" go down and so the bullshit must go up!

It's definitely getting worse.
They thought their standover tactics would work
Yes
Actually come to think of it they were probably all 99.4 so enjoy Rebel while it lasts
But they don't entertain...they just let a constant stream of drivel emanate forth...and they aren't funny...
And not even good noise. I listened to commercial radio a few weeks back, for the first time in easily a decade (intentionally, at least). In the 20 minutes I could stand it, I caught the tail end of one song and then listened to a pair of twatwaffles prattling on. It was just dumb. Switched over to the classical station for the rest of the drive.
Nah, I was taking the piss out of Merrick and Rosso. Sorry for the confusion.
*wet fart sound*
*whap whap whap whap whap whap whaaaaaaaaaap*
*I'm not touching that one!*
It's Douche Nation on the Sploosh Station!
*Vadge 

Helen Razer please come back
Gazza, Wazza and the Fkn
Fucking lost my shit at this
Yeah, and Get This was brilliant too.
Bargearse. The pinnacle of entertainment.
Champagne comedy
“Hello Shed World!”
I miss the Venga bus jokes that were so cringe that they went full circle to being funny again.
Team Effort Podcast if for you then my friend!!
Never coming back sadly. They had a falling out years ago and have never talked to each other since
Same. Mick Molloy just isn’t the same without Tony Martin.
Frangers pork sword of justice!
Pffft typical NameO fan response
Fucken get off it mate! NameO hasn't been funny in 20 years, which coincidentally is how long it's been since I was a teenager!
I discovered DoubleJ recently. Love it.
If a station goes more than 40 minutes without playing Foo Fighters, Chilli Peppers or Guns n Roses, Ladbrokes pulls their advertising.
They know how to take a good song and abuse the fuck out of it until you can no longer stand it. I used to find as a tradie that having to listen to that shit was a kind of cruel and unusual punishment like you'd do to someone in a cage at gitmo.
I could easily go for 2 years without hearing The Pretender again. I swear it gets played at least twice per day during work hours (I work in a warehouse, the radio is always on).
If they ever played anything from the first two albums(besides Everlong, My Hero) I would think I've won the lottery.
\*vinyl scratch sound\*  
YOU'RE NOW LISTENING TO  
\*car crash sound\*  
102.3  
\*elephant noise\*  
REAL ROCK FM  
\*explosion\*  
WHERE WE PLAY NOTHING BUT ROCK  
\*glass shattering sound\*  
\*police siren\*  
THIS AIN'T YOUR GRANNY'S RADIO STATION SO GET READY  
\*Imagine Dragons - radioactive starts playing\*
The other fave is always the man vs woman thing. “Uh, men never pick up their socks. “ 
“Women are always late, haha”. 

Wow so original . Gosh, that has never been done
With all the bullshit going on in the world right now, and all the arguments and division, personally I wish spent more of my life talking about weetbix and less of it talking about politics. 

5. I do five weetbix, because my bowl doesn't fit any more. And I do full cream UHT milk, no sugar. And a black coffee. I don't like to do too much improvising in the morning. 

A while ago I got into a good rhythm of cooking eggs, or maybe some yoghurt with muesli and fruit, but honestly who has got time for that? Me, I do, I've got heaps of time I just don't fucking want to actually. 

Put kettle on, put 5 weetbix into bowl, put milk into bowl, get spoon, put coffee in cup, put boiled water in cup, eat. I love the simplicity of it, and importantly, while that nice little process is happening I have to endure no more than background levels of existential dread and anxiety over world affairs I have no control over. 

I like weetbix and I like talking about them.
It’s a problem across all Australian media and I think it comes down to the fact our entertainment industry has been very insular with an insane amount of gate keeping that goes on with very few options for new people to get into the industry. When we do actually produce something that feels interesting and original once or twice a decade, something like Bluey, it feels like a fucking miracle
I don't know. Radio isn't really big here in Germany anymore. People still listen to it on occasion, but it's definitely not the thing that has posters advertising the dream team of morning radio or stuff like that. I actually find it weird that people really care about radio that much still in Australia. Don't cars have fancy screens where you can chuck your Spotify playlist on?
You're not wrong. I was away in the UK from the mid 1990s until the mid 2000s and when I got back and watched the telly for the first time I was" WTF has happened to TV?!?"... Endless shite, drivel and more ads that I ever recall...

I can see why streaming has become popular. I don't have it though, now all of my 'TV' consumption is done through downloading the stuff I want from 'other' places...
> This is the format that sells for mainstream Australia

I actually don't think this is what's going on. No one's listening to the radio anymore, so there's no good talent. In the past when there was a lot more money we had the likes of Martin/Molloy, Merrick and Rosso, Mikey Robbins, etc. All talented comedians.

I'm convinced that some stations are no longer run by humans. I was listening to SmoothFM the other weekend in Sydney and Richard Wilkins was the 'host' between songs. The weather in Sydney was miserable and bucketing down with rain, but he said I hope you're all getting out and about on this beautiful weekend!

I'm fairly sure they've got an entire library of pre-recorded soundbites for him and they just mix it in between the same old SmoothFM playlist. There's no reason for humans to work there anymore except to chase advertisers. They don't even need to chase new music.
Unless you live in Melbourne, where RRR and PBS exist.
Triple J is pretty much the same format now
I used to work at a Maccas in a suburb not far from the city and  Brendan Fevola used to come through drive thru, pay for his meal in all coins and then get shitty when we took too long to count out all the coins and make sure it was the right amount
Never been big on him since the Lara Bingle furore. All very nasty in hindsight.
Their playlist is certainly more expansive than any commercial station.
You’re not wrong. I immediately turn them off, they are always just looking to complain or edge as close as possible to saying something controversial 🙄. It’s tired and reminds me of an old aunt and uncle who just want to shake their fist at the world but are not realising they are part of what they shake their fist at.
It still annoys me that that's not how averages work.

Edit: Itt, a bunch of people try to call other people stupid while believing in IQ tests.
Someone posted a map of how Australian borders have changed over the years. The first one had New South Wales cover half the landmass and Western Australia was a blank void.

I realised in that moment it's all a simple misunderstanding - Australian media execs just need to update their maps.
What do you expect, it's Sydney.
Exactly. Feels as if they're not meant to land either. He's really just a weird bully with a platform he doesn't deserve in the slightest.
Is that on Audible?
The Frenzal Rhomb incident made her look like a right tool.
Billboards are actually fantastic advertising, which is why Australia is now full of them. Everywhere you fucking go, ads. Bus stations, entry to shopping centres, even sides of busses. Physical ads are really successful.
Cool, but it's still empty 6 months later. Who exactly benefits here?
Madlad, Fucboi & Female
I'm still dirty that they cancelled that show.  It was the highest rated show triple M had.  I actually tuned in just for that show.  And they canned it to make more money for their breakfast show hosts, who have been horrible for ever.
no.  how would you be able to satisfy multiple music tastes?  I've tried, you really can't.  Just put the radio on, then everyone can listen to equally mediocre music.
They didn't.
I think the fact that they could be real people is very indicative of the problem.
#ME SO HOOOOORRRNNNYYY-
We'll be back in two and 2.
hoho, hohooooooo, hohohohohooooooo
Wouldn't go near that one with a fifty-foot pole
I miss Helen and Judith. Even Helen and Mikey. In fact give us Helen and Judith and Mikey.
And Mikey Robbins. Classic morning radio.
People want ducks
This is dizzy stuff folks
Sorry for spamming but you listened to Team Effort podcast?
Sure was.  Way too smart for MmM
Leave it out Bargearse, that’s not you talking, it’s the spuds.
There's a dude at work that gets called Bargearse by the boss, gives me a chuckle every time.
Wish it was more regular, but it's a nice consolation.
Pretty sure they're on speaking terms now.
Come on, the more chart orientated are Taylor Swift, Taylor Swift, Ed Sheeran, and for variety some Taylor Swift.
I’m 100% MMM is calling Scar Tissue new rock still. That and Sex And Candy.
AD FREE 20 MINUTE NON STOP BLOCK OF TOCKLEY STOMPING ROCK ON A NO REPEAT WORKDAY.... HERE'S PETER CETERA
God damn that was perfect.
Sounds like vrock from vice City.
Sorry for the tiktok link, but super relevant

https://www.tiktok.com/@_bernardtaylor1/video/7277982835812699434
> 102.3

That's much funnier if you live in Canberra than it is for Adelaide 

102.3 is ABC Classic FM...

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ABC_Classic#FM_broadcast_frequencies
5 more in row 23fm 
[D-generation 23fm](https://youtu.be/JJYcx9-xdlE?si=4Cpj7HWUcVPQ_dAg)
Boys, fellas out there, have you ever mixed up the dunny and the washing basket? Come on now come clean fellas!
The audio equivalent of r/AskReddit
UHT milk on weetbix is crazy.

 I do use UHT for most things that require milk but that's because I don't really use a lot of milk so that's the only way to have it on hand without constantly wasting off milk. But it has such a specific taste to it that I couldn't eat it with cereal.


I actually don't often eat breakfast in general and haven't had weetbix probably since high school. I miss weetbix. Maybe you've inspired me to start eating weetbix again.
I've had a bit of exposure to the local stand-up comedy scene in recent years through active friends, and it's depressing that there are so many genuinely funny and interesting people out there who never get a shot because they're not in with the right crowd. It doesn't matter how hard they work for it, if you don't suck up to the right people there's no chance.
> I think it comes down to the fact our entertainment industry has been very insular with an insane amount of gate keeping that goes on with very few options for new people to get into the industry.

Which is ultimately caused by a lack of funding, infrastructure and cultural care about arts in general, is it any wonder that we have a shit entertainment industry when the classic Aussie past time is shitting on people for getting an art degree? When the social norm is to be as hostile as all get out to anyone who would try to pursue something, it's no great surprise that said thing just dries up and dies off within a country.

Honestly convinced the only reason that Aunty Donna was able to find its legs is because they could just shove Broden forward in meetings and he seems "blokey" enough that execs signed off without looking at their actual content.
This is just an opinion, but people don’t just listen to the radio for music. It keeps them connected to a larger group. It’s a shared experience and you are somehow connected to everyone else listening. Especially when people call in.

Listening to Apple Music or Spotify, maybe you can share playlists but it’s not a realtime, shared experience and you are cut off from the world. It’s the same with podcasts. Although these days podcasts are much better content, they  don’t have the same feeling as radio. 

If you look at stats less than half of the German population listen to radio daily, but 30 million say they listen daily. In Australia it’s slightly more than half, around 13 million daily listeners.
Richard Wilkins is currently just an MP3 soundboard with one of those "Drinking water bird" toys randomly hitting buttons.
Also, comedians tend to hate the schedule of radio  see: wil Anderson, so they can’t keep the actually entertaining talent. 

Plus risk adverse management
Are we sure Richard Wilkins is still alive? I'm fairly sure they replaced him with an AI version at least 5 years ago.
2SER and FBI in Sydney
This is the way. And with the wonders of the Internet, you don't even need to live in Melbourne anymore.
Don't forget 3CR in Melbourne. Their shows cover a huge range of interesting topics. 
There's a few gems on the Js, but there are some real bad ones too.

Hobba and Hing were the best in the recent past from an entertainment perspective. 

What's made JJJ good for me in the past was that the hosts were genuinely funny, but could also present a serious topic, or have genuine knowledge about the music and artists that were played. 

Now it's largely shit talk back, shit feuds between shows, with presenters that seem to be completely clueless about music and everything other than tiktok trends. 

Again, not everyone is 'bad', there are definitely some really good presenters left, but the overall quality across the station has dropped.
Yep, just with no ads for solar panel installers or window tinting shop.
Scumbag Corp replaced Kingsmill with the ex Nova Head right? No wonder!
I come to Reddit for anecdotes like this.
What a fukken dunce
If intelligence (in the form of IQ) sits on a bell curve and 100 is the mean (it’s also the median and the mode on a bell curve) then it would be true that at least half of the people below the mean/median/mode would have an IQ lower than 100. 

Having said all that, Carlin was a comedian first and a social commentator second, so take it as you will.
Median is a type of average.
Yeah it's very successful; at visually polluting the city everywhere you go. In 2016, I spent a bit of time in Poland and also western Ukraine. Poland is part of the EU, and very well integrated into the western bloc at this point. Ukraine wasn't, and a city like Lviv (historically connected with Poland and Poles, they even have a statue of Adam Mickiewicz in the centre) shows a stark difference. 

Namely not being bombarded by billboards and advertising in public spaces anywhere near the same frequency as Poland. Felt like a bit of a throwback, and makes you reflect on the things you take for granted as "normal."
OP certainly nailed it with the generic names. They could also include the manly voice-over guy who moonlights on gambling ads.
They *used* to be real people, now they're in commercial radio. Possibly early AI generating the mic breaks.
Don't touch that dial
*And we're rolling out another ad-free hour on your no-repeat workday, starting with Bryan Adams singing Summer of '69*
SHE doesn’t need an opinion/own last name/say/degree/brain cell, that’s what us BLOKES are for!

*cue feminine tittering and oh-you-boys!*
The Ladies Lounge!
Judith Lucy is a national treasure.
this is dizzy stuff
The girls happy.
You’re the guy that was in that magazine, getting up his missus
Good, hopefully that means we'll get to see "Boytown Confidential"
There is hope 🤞
He was mmm boy, you were a nova boy, he was good enough for you
God bless Wozza The Rock Dog and Ron E Sparks.
I believe it’s an old greentext
The Vice City radio stations were amazing haha I’d legit listen to them if they were real
102.3FM is Mix in Adelaide
Taken a shit in your inlaws tropical fish tank after a late night out? Come on, be honest!
Cracking comment! So true
Exactly, the talent exists but they never get a look in here.
I remember Broden saying on one of his podcasts that Andy Lee helped them completely redo their pitch to netflix for their show. Every chance Big Ol' House of Fun doesn't exist without his input
RTRFM in Perth. Their breakfast and drive time shows shit all over anything from the feckless fucks on mainstream FM radio
>Having said all that, Carlin was a comedian first 

this 

The joke is formed by conflating two different type of average. 

So yeah the mean average has half the people being below that.

However the average person isn't just one person on the median value. It's a whole mass of people that don't stand out as different from the majority of other people. Let's call them people with an IQ from 90 to 110 (the margin of error in IQ tests), even though calling someone average doesn't have to be in reference to intelligence. 

If the average person is 50% of the population clustered around the 100 IQ mark. That just leaves about 25% of the population dumber than the average person. *Results may vary. 

This was a fine way to ruin a good joke. Have a nice weekend.
You're absolutely correct but we both know he meant the colloquial use of average (mean).
Next up, it's Songs for the Deaf - you can't even hear it!
Hey lets talk shit over the intro to a good song that has a banger intro
Uh got muh first real six string …
If I'd kept a buck everytime I'd heard that fucking song on triple m..fuck I hate that manufactured blokey bullshit.
😂😂😂
He handed me a business card, the address, the Netherlands
ASSAULT ASSAULT! you touched me officer sorry
“I was wearing tight shorts, I was flying around in pink helicopters, and a bright pair of newcomers called Bros had the world at their feet.”
It's hard when you talk quick...me-member
How good is this?!
so they leave for UK or USA
4ZZZ in Brisbane, genuinely the best radio channel in the world, such an enormous range of talent and genre's that literally any time you tune in it's something new and every time it's presented by someone with genuine passion and knowledge for it, love it.
The breakfast show for the drive in and full freq for the drive home. Also jam down vershun and soul sides fri and sat night. General Justice is a legend
And Carlin's still correct, because the distribution will be close enough to symmetrical, whether it's normal or something else.

Even if it's not symmetrical, "half" is a close enough approximation for 48-52% being dumber than average, whichever average you use.
So he was only technically correct (the best kind of correct).
When I was a teen I thought it was 

I got my first real sex dream...
Not as much as I hate it.
Bryan Adams? That’s. HARD ROCK.
Rhhheemember me?!

Gee, thanks a lot
You know, my long blond locks
Makes the line “played it till my fingers bled” hit real different
I'm gonna sing it like that from now on!
So good! Every time I hear the Matchbox 20 Song 'How far we come' I still add in the 'How come How come' from Tony's edit lol
<Nodding profusely>
Gee thanks a lot
This comment made me laugh til my fingers bled. Still chuckling...
You touched me officer. Sorry
Yes! I also like the John Howard "mmm" in the short silence between notes at the end of Foo Fighters' 'the pretender'
