As title suggests, I understand this will be an unpopular opinion, however I can’t stand just exclusively using streaming services all day and don’t get me started on the crap on FTA.

Yes it’s expensive (however if you have all the main streaming services at once, it’s at least comparable in price) but I’m old school in that I really like just turning the tv on and watching whatever is on rather than having to choose ‘on demand’ streaming the whole time. I find that to be a chore.

I’m very comfortable watching reruns of all my favorite shows and movies - and Foxtel does a pretty good job in keeping the rights to most major/popular shows e.g. Seinfeld, Friends, The Office etc. There’s almost always a decent movie on - would I deliberately go and seek out Jurassic World on Netflix, nope. But will I watch it if it’s already on, yep. 

Is there enough of a market out there for it to remain viable (I.e. people like me) or does today’s news about News Corp considering selling Foxtel mean I’m going to lose this battle eventually.

TL;DR I hate streaming, Foxtel for the win. 
Every time I’m at my parents house or the in-laws and watching foxtel, I’m more and more amazed at how little is on for so many channels. It’s full of unwatchable shit.
I worked for them for a week once... Dear god... They behaved like vultures. Going door to door HARASSING people and refusing to accept no for an answer.

One woman started venting that she couldn't afford anything like that because her young daughter had cancer and they were struggling with bills. The guy training me dead ass looked at this lady and said "I'm sure your daughter would appreciate having Foxtel to watch then".

I was horrified. I never even signed up for sales, it was advertised as reception then they just tossed me into the field.
OK boomer.
We cancelled Foxtel with the set top box and signed up for Foxtel Now. Slightly cheaper and you can still just watch something (not that we do... appointment tv blows).
"old school in that I really like just turning the tv on and watching whatever is on rather than having to choose ‘on demand’ streaming the whole time. I find that to be a chore."

You have the normal FTA channels that do that? If making a decision isn't your strong point, why pay for 30 versions of it when you have all the FTA multichannels now?
i have foxtel for AFL and F1 in 4k.  

when i stop hearing about how awful the Kayo app is, i'll consider switching. in the meantime, my partner is addicted to all the 'lifestyle' shows.
Yep, we've got foxtel. There isn't lots to watch, but I just whack on the comedy channel or something. I never watch netflix. My partner watches a lot of sport on foxtel, and I don't hear good things about Kayo streaming, so we just keep it. 
You should check out Foxtels streaming service. It's a bit cheaper than using their box and it still gives you access to their channels.

I definitely see the appeal to just being able to look at the guide to see what's playing atm and flip over to it, but paying for a service and still being bombarded with ads is just bullshit (I know that's not even exclusively a foxtel problem any more, most streaming services seem to have ads unless you pay even more, but that's why I cancelled those services too lol)
c'mon man don't you just wanna see another episode of pawn stars or judge judy? like, just one more?
FTA is just rubbish these days - it’s almost quite literally exclusively reality TV. 

I may not have been clear, I like Foxtel, I have no complaints, my post was more so trying to gauge if I’m the only one who thinks this. I’m happy to pay for it because I enjoy it so much and get a lot of value out of it.
Yep I need my HD F1, cricket, afl and nfl
I feel like Kayo is garbage on certain devices. I use it through an Apple TV and can’t say I’ve had any issues myself.

But I could easily see cheap development causing issues for the myriad of various Google TV devices out there
Didn't have 4k until recently
The box has heaps of actual useful features you don’t get on streaming - ‘start over’, on demand etc you don’t get with the streaming- not a big deal for movies and shows but extremely helpful for live sports.
They would be worlds better than the shit I usually flick past
Also the start over, rewind and on demand features are too good
is there a native appleTV app, or do you have to cast via your phone?
scheduled recording is handy too, means you can fast forward the ads.
Native app
oh nice. i wonder why they won't make one for foxtel now :/
