So, the women's Olympic Water Polo semi-final was just being replayed on Channel 9. It was AUS vs USA and the full-time score was drawn at 8-8, which means a penalty shoot is required. They take a quick ad break before showing the penalty shootout, during which the news brief mentioned the outcome of the match.

Thanks for ruining it, Channel Nine, you fools!!!
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Their 9Now apps are full of spoilers. Instead of just saying “Final” it will say “Australia wins final”
I was just about to watch the replay but now I know it’s going to be 8-8…. Thanks OP…..
I mean. You are watching a replay of it.
Channel 9 have been announcing the result all day
 Unrelated but I don't want to start a new thread. I'm watching the gold medal mens hockey replay and the 9 commentary you get on the replay is appalling, they've spent the first quarter talking about what to expect, Australian hockey unrelated to the game, rules they don't like but not what's going on. They didn't actually call the game. The crowd noise has been turned down so you can't hear even the ball being hit. Watch live though we get the international commentary which is excellent and they actually call the game. 

Rant over.
My first trip to the snow when I was 10 we had to drive home from thredbo early in the morning so couldn't stay up. We spent all day with no radio and no one could look at the stacks of newspapers at every servo we stopped at. Watching the replay on SBS they have a newsbreak: "France has won the 1998 FIFA World Cup". Unforgivable.
Replay*
Boy I really hope someone got fired for that blunder.
The men's water polo against use ended in a draw too. The ods are on
Watch it live next time
Spoiler alert ...dam it!
A true shit show, watching with 9
Here's another spoiler before you watch 'Titanic'.

It sank.
Reminds me of those "Last Two Minutes" AFL videos that used to spoil the results in the thumbmail and/or title. It took months of backlash before they finally fixed it. Sadly, some of the individual club videos still spoil it.
Oh great I skipped reading the post to avoid spoilers since im about to watch it and now I know its going to be 8-8, Thanks a lot!
Do you know how much money I lost? I mean what are the chances they’d beat them twice???
Bruh.
I'm sure they have,  But 60 seconds from the end of the game during the replay? That's some poor programming.
Agreed, the Australian Olympic hockey coverage and commentary has been the worst 😩 we need a medal for putting up with it
omg, that's sooo much worse...I can imagine their switchboard lighting up instantly with all the complaints, lol.
Yeah, ever notice you're not allowed to edit the title of posts.
I went out of my way not to read any Olympics results.
Hey, I didn't give away the result of the penalty shoot out. And the post title should have warned you,
"But it's so good that you'd still enjoy it, even if you already know he dies."

(Actual innocent comment from a friend when I asked them not to tell me about Titanic the day before I was going to see it, lol.)
haha, I don't buy it. You would have seen my post heading and not read the text. :-)
haha, it's like listening to an Australian cricket captain comment about the intricacies of competitive diving. :-)
I luckily never had to. Reddit sucks for that though
That doesn’t mean the rest of the world is waiting for you to watch it before talking about it
Apart from watching a news report of it
How did that go for you

Any social media or ads are an instant red flag, the only approach is watching it on 9now if they have replays (not the live feed showing the replay) because they aren't going to stop selling the news.

Sucks but it is what it is
Badly worded by me - was referring to Channel 9's continued incompetency.
It's not me, it was channel 9 televising the replay, then in their own ad break, immediately before the shootout THEY are televising, they announce the result.
It flashed from the game directly to someone announcing the result...pretty funny really.
They didn't though... They were watching the replay of the game, it cut to an ad break and the ad contained the result of the game they were watching.
Yeah, but you still don't expect them to announce the result of the match THEY are telecasting when there are only a couple of minutes of the match left.
Although disappointing, it was also kind of funny that it happened. My whole family was sitting there stunned and facepalming, lol
Could have watched it on the 9now app and not have news updates.
Maybe don't watch the ads
Except that the 9now app is full of spoiler titles.
Never even noticed. Don’t think it does…
So, as you scroll through, looking for a particular event to watch, there are plenty of photos of Aussies holding up their gold medal accompanied with titles telling you that Australia got gold in the event. Hard not to see because you are reading the clip titles to find the thing you want to watch.
