Holy shit car insurance is fucked here price wise now . There are really companies out there expecting me to pay $120 to $150 a month for a god damn Mitsubishi that's 9 years old, currently with youi which ive been paying $83 a month, but as of next month when it renews they want $96, yet they are still the cheapest for me. 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
12 year old Hyundai 
Mid 40’s driver, female 
Only ever claimed a windscreen 
It’s been 20 years since my last speeding ticket 

It’s about $120 a month to insure

I’m probably going to drop comprehensive and just have the third party property
I don’t know anyone who saves money with youi - they have ALWAYS been 60% more expensive for my quotes…try Cole’s, bingle, budget, aami, etc - takes a minute to get a quote online…
Try Bingle car insurance. Was previously with Qantas (for FF point bonus) and was quoted 2k for renewal. Someone recommended Bingle - got a quote and it was literally $900. Insane.
its not your car, it is you and your old car hitting someone/something else and costing a bomb.

I kid you not.  in 2020 Second hand (4 years old) Mercedes Benz C250 (50K) for my wife was $2000 a year.  Brand new Golf Gti (45K) $1200 pa

basically lots of order woman (shes 60) swapping paint in MB whereas it doesnt seem to happen with GTIs? making the car seem more of a risk and thus higher premium?
Like everything, costs have sky-rocketed. Parts are expensive and hard to source, especially for older cars. Costs of repairs are expensive, staffing levels have not gone back to pre-covid levels for repair companies, hire car costs have gone up a shit ton... It's the same for home insurance. Combine that with reinsurance companies pulling out of the Australian market, and you have a shit time.


All this is to say it's not you and not much you can do about it. Third party property damage is cheaper, but won't cover damage to your car. It's also not CTP, don't confuse it with that. Places like Bingle or whatever can be cheaper because it is online only for policy management (it's Suncorp so there are claims people to speak to) but realistically they'll all be similar costs cause they all have the same pressures (unless they remove something, like bingle with the policy stuff).
It's insane. I just switched from Youi to Shannon's for my car. Youi increased mine by $35 per month. Shannons is only $5 cheaper per month compared to Youi however I was able to insure it for an agreed value and also have choice of repairer, which Youi didn't offer at all. Such bullshit that my insurance has jumped so much per month
It's not just the cost of replacing your car. It's the cost of writing off someone else's $100,000+ sports car. The value of your car is only half the puzzle, and not necessarily the bigger half.
Try quoting that for insurance in the UK and see how lucky you actually are.
How old are you?
If you have the car in a garage/ car port behind a locked gate and it has a car alarm shannons will give you the best deal for sure on a agreed value.
I pay $140pm but my car is 3 years old and market value is still around 40k
Early 40s, and Im through PD and my 2010 car is only about $40 a month
My 20 yo RAV4 3dr is $96 month. Best I could find if I wanted a realistic replacement value. Starting to wonder if having a 3nd car runabout is worth it.
There’s a company called Oceania insurance. They are unwritten by AG. I’ve found them cheaper than the bigger companies. The catch is they are online only. I think you can call AG and talk to a human if you need too.

I claimed once. Was an ok experience.
Wife's 4 year old Honda HRV was like $90 a month full comp. Brand new hilux rogue was $80 a month full comp
This was a while ago.
It's the statistics of that type/model of car being involved in an accident. Not necessarily you as a person that makes the difference. Both cars were in my name. Opened my eyes a bit when buying a car to check the premium before purchasing. Also try Allianz. Currently have a 2017 200 series and it's $118 a month full comp
Also if you don't think you'll be the at fault driver in an accident change your excess to the max, agreed market value to the minimum and get rid of the hire car option if you don't need it
I pay $96 per month with aami. Fully comp, roadside assist. agreed value $48k and it's a 5 year Kia stinger gt. I have the top no claims rating and it's $750 excess. Garaged at home, is driven during peak hours and 20k a year in KMs. 40 yo male.

My other car was $82 same deal except value $28k and 6 years old. That was going to cost $110 on renewal if I had gone through with it.

Never needed to make a claim with aami but who knows. I have dashcams which I hope would help
[removed]
Wow, you've got cheap insurance!!


And just because you've got a 9 year old car doesn't mean you can't hit a $200k one.
Why worry about a car loan? Unless you're in an extreme situation where you need to take out a loan to get a very basic car that you absolutely require, only buy a car that you can afford to pay in cash.
Probably your driving history, or lack of preferred research into a suitable insurance company and likely rolled with the first choice available.... Either that or your car has extensive history of damage..
Don't get comprehensive
Try having an import then enjoy even higher prices -\_-
So don't insure it.
Last time I looked into that it was about 20% cheaper than fully comprehensive.
aami an youi seem to be the only ones under $100, an aami only really beats youi by $2 for me, which is weird since they quoted me $115 2 years ago
Although if you have an accident Bingle sucks and takes ages to assess and get your money to you.
Ill have to check them out!! i looked at qbe, they were almost $800 more a year
There is such a thing as too cheap.
35, clean driving history.  Living on the goldcoast might be the problem since no one here seems to know how to drive
But only if you have a special car or are a "motoring enthusiast".  I know a few people who've been rejected.
People cut off "girl cars". They don't cut off hiluxes. I have a hatch and my husband has a hilux. People stay out of the way of his car but absolutely push their way through and bully mine all over the road. I can see how it'd be a bigger risk to insure mine. 

Its bullshit because I've never had an accident or even a speeding fine but dickhead joe blow in his 15 year old falcon thinks he's more important than me and has the right to cut me off and that causes the statistics to say my car is more likely to be in a crash so my insurance has to cost more.
Not if you're at fault in an accident and cause damage to a much more expensive car than yours and you have to pay for it out of pocket. Or are not at fault but are on your own against an insurance company that claims you are.
Can confirm - someone insured with Bingle hit me four months ago and wrote off my car. Still haven’t got the money.
Also live on the Gold Coast. Also can confirm the drivers here a fucking horrendous.
Im a 37 year old woman who has a common as fuck Mercedes c220 and they insured me straight away. I don't participate in car meets but I do go occasionally to cars and coffee just to have a squiz every once in a while. By no means do I have an XB or something cool as fuck
Absolutely false. I have my Subaru Forester insured with them.
[removed]
This is what a third-party policy is for, not comprehensive.
Same happened to me about 9 months ago. I put in a complaint via email to bingle and that seeker to get the ball moving more. Still took forever.
Ok so what's your insurance doing? 

You may be worth getting a lawyer involved if you're not going through your insurance, they can hassle them for it as it's their liability
It's declined exponentially over the last 4-5 years. Before that it was rare to encounter idiocy, let alone a few times every time you go out like it is now
Yeah alright, interesting.  Thanks!
Did they ask you any questions about your feeling about cars?

Also a forester qualifies as the kind of car that gets "done up" sometimes I guess?
Ah sorry I think I misread that and thought you meant CTP only (which is a very bad idea). I don't think it ends up being that much cheaper for third party property vs fully comprehensive even if your car is a bit older.
I had third party so nothing. I’m literally just waiting for the payout.
They do ask some additional questions about usage and storage, because they have options of cheaper insurance for some of those circumstances.

We've had brand new regular cars, classics, and very modified cars, nothing has ever been a problem. 

They were even willing to quote to insure my parents' horse float recently, until during the quoting they learned that it had plumbing, which moved into caravan-like territory and therefore excluded it with them.
