
If only the Liberal party plonkers had gone with fibre optic instead of copper then this wouldn't be happening.
Good old copper broadband network. Flawless
Cooper theft... wow.

I thought we could not get lower.... but here we are.
This seems like a really high-risk, low-yield thieving venture.

Copper scrap fetches bugger all, maybe $3-5/kg. If it's dirty, covered in insulation or otherwise diluted with other crap, even less.

Imagine going to gaol for making $50 for hours of (illegal) work.
Commenters above seem to think there is no copper in a fibre only network….
There absolutely is - the power cables to run the switches etc. 

But yeh the folk who do this stuff just crack it open, cut and yank anything that might be copper and hope for the best.
Shoulda gone fibre optic, there's no copper in there
[deleted]
Can’t have shit in Woodend.
Liberal/National party…. Copper is good we are the smartest people
So are they going to replace it with new copper wire or actually put in fibre optic now?
If only the copper price hadn't gone so high..... And if my aunt had balls she'd be my uncle
If only the copper price hadn't gone so high..... And if my auntie had balls she'd be my uncle
"Yesterdays technology today!"
Labor has been quietly upgrading to FTTP. Woodend might shoot up the priority list.
I know it's tempting to say this given it was such a stupid plan by the LNP, but the thieves often open up fibre pits too and just start ripping stuff out looking for copper. They're not the sharpest bunch.
The iron wire will be fine.
The irony, Victoria is Labor heartland so most likely these are Labor voters too, if only this happened in QLD.
Desperate times no longer lay ahead, they're now.
Decades ago thieves ripped out kilometres of electrical cable from a new estate in North Western Sydney...
Happens a lot more than you think, it just never makes the news. 

We had thieves break into a site and steal a 100 or so metres of cable. They would have got a massive fright and left early as one of them was live when they cut it.
Quite common these days unfortunately.
There’s very little comparatively.

The hint is in the name Gigabit Passive Optical Network. It uses light prisms to split signals, not active switches. 

A completely passive Fibre Area Network can service thousands of homes.
Blame Liberal for that
Totally untrue. There are multiple towers, most recently a new Telstra 5g one on top of Coles. 

Voda/Optus have bugger all reception, yes. But blame those companies for not expanding outside of metro areas, not the town
It looks like they might have to.
And if the LNP wins power they will probably that copper is good idea and go back to it!

I was on the "unplanned, unsure and wait forever" semi rural area list. However when Labor took power it moved rapidly up the list and I got the notification that my area was proceeding as a high priority. (not a labor seat)

To the pit it was 800 metres and when I contacted them  before Labor came to power it was going to have to be my responsibility as it was "customer cabling" and I was going to have to trench by contractor. They already targeted the expensive installation properties  and inferred that it was a "user pays" installation without even checking what trenches and cabling was in the ground. It was planned as a ripoff and price gouge.

The farce  of the copper cheap broad band became self evident within in minutes. I had a telephone line, powerline and 2 telex cables in the trench already. When the new NBN came they did the optic fibre and Network termination box in a half day. I would suggest that there was going to be thousands of people that would have  had out of pocket rip off expenses if the coalitions plan was running as they planned and all it would have amounted too was a rip off of consumers with unnecessary costs that was not needed when it could have been pulled in the existing trenches.

The sad part was the NBN job could have been done properly and so quickly a long long time ago if it was not for these idiots and their 3rd world internet technology, and that's insulting the 3rd world because even they were smart enough to use optic fibre.
> Labor has been quietly upgrading to FTTP.

This program was estimated under the [previous LNP government](https://www.crn.com.au/news/nbn-co-to-spend-35-billion-to-upgrade-some-fttn-connections-to-full-fibre-553749).
If it does, someone might be inspired to steal the copper in my neighbourhood...
I guess if it had been fibre from the get go, they wouldn't have had to bother looking in any of the pits.
"NOT COPPER"

https://www.reddit.com/r/mildlyinteresting/comments/br3dd7/giant_spool_of_fiber_optic_cable_had_to_display/
Well - that takes me back

To the 23rd of November 1910... Debate in the House of Reps about replacing iron with copper


>Some time ago I met a gentleman who came here from the Old Country, who ridiculed the expensive practice of using copper wire where iron wire would do, the latter costing only 1 1/2 d per lb., and the former 10 1/2 d. The price of iron wire does not fluctuate much, but that of copper fluctuates a good deal. The year before last it was about nd. a lb.

>Mr Thomas Brown:
>– Copper is used for greater efficiency.

>Mr MATHEWS:
>– The practical men in the Department, not the theorists, think that nothing is gained by using copper wire for short lines. Some of the iron wire lines have been in use for thirty years, and give as good results now as copper wire lines. 


https://historichansard.net/hofreps/1910/19101123_reps_4_59/#subdebate-2-0
The XPT accident at Wallan a few years ago was a direct result of copper wire constantly being stolen in that area.
Of course I know who to blame for that.

Though Albo isn't blameless either. He could change the target state of NBN now to bring fast fibre optic.
Task failed successfully
Unfortunately the old copper is still in the pit after a fibre upgrade...
NBN cables are just one of dozens of comms networks in the ground through your average country town.
