it would be the first time in 60+ years Australia has come 3rd in the olympics (the only time in the 100+ year history we've come 3rd was 1956 in melbourne).  
Even in 2000 Sydney we edged 4th.

with 2.5 days left in the olympics, and a fewer and fewer number of events countries below us (particularly France) having a shot at golds, our chances of holding onto our lead are looking decent. fingers crossed!
Pretty special. No Russia has helped everyone. They had 20 golds in Tokyo and came 4th. Although idk how much crossover of medals won by Russia are in events we are competitive in. 

I do know one sport it completely changed was fencing. They had half the fencing medals last olympics. Really opened up the field this time.
There should be an Olympic medal medal, they give us a really big bronze medal that we can hang around the Cape York Peninsula.
IDK.  If we don't win any more gold and the UK doesn't beat us, it'll be their worst performance since Athens in 2004.
The Russia ban has helped everyone. They are actually a beast at the olympics.
You’ve just jinxed us. Nice one
Australia was robbed in breaking smh 
Surprised Raygun didn’t get us gold for break dancing
Ready to spam this meme: https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/bronze-medal
It's all for the Bermagui Bronze
Does that mean we get a huuuge bronze medal we can hang off the Harbour Bridge?
RIP Breakdancing
What medal did the break dancer get?
Saw a US news rank us lower because they based it on total medals.

Personally I'd prefer an objective rule to tallying.

If we give Gold 3 points, Silver 2 points and Bronze 1 point, it would be more objective. We'd still be in the running for 3rd place too, but others like UK would not be far behind.

https://i.imgur.com/QCDXZn4.png
As a USian, I'm rooting for you!
Japan is 2 gold medals behind us, which at first seems like not a lot but I gues it kind of is?
It's proof that, as a country of 30 million people, we take sport way too seriously and feel that it somehow meaningfully establishes us on a world stage. I look at it as small man syndrome, translated to sport.
Except "coming 3rd in the Olympics" just isn't recognised as a thing.

Yes, there is a medal tally useful for comparisons. But if anyone said "hey, USA *won the Olympics*" then that just doesn't mean anything. There is no prize or medal or mention during the closing ceremony at all.
So our country gets a large bronze medal? Neat.
With our latest performance, i wouldn't blame the IOC for taking back all our medals and ejecting us from the competition
Honestly. Who cares.


Have you seen the cost of housing in Australia for young people?  The country is completely broken 
I mean we also have the third highest number of athletes participating after US/France so I'm not sure it's THAT impressive. Give me the results over 100 years on a no. athlete's per capita basis or something
[deleted]
Where’s Russia? Did you forget to pick them up from practice on the way there?
“We”  Wow, are you on the team?
Does anyone really care if we come 3rd or 30th in a sport medal tally?
[deleted]
I'm embarrassed that we achieved so well. We care too much about sport. It's ridiculous.
It's also the underperformance of GB and France (host). GB got 22 last Olympics and actually got more than China in Rio.

Them getting less than mid-teens is pretty abnormal. Though there was a Pom in the Olympics thread that calculated that they missed out on like 5 gold medals by 1 sec in total. So their luck has also been hilariously bad (from an Aus POV).
Russian athletes still competed as the “Individual Neutral Athletes” with a special flag, but outside of tennis, they didn’t compete in that many events and also couldn’t compete in team-based sports. 

I think they only sent like, 10 athletes total and no Belarusians were in that squad. The team, represented by the abbreviation “AIN”, are also not officially recognised on the medal tally as they are technically not an official Olympic delegation, and have only just one medal in Paris, a silver won by Mirra Andreeva and Diana Shnaider in women’s doubles tennis.
I actually went and looked. 

Two swimming golds. 100m and 200m backstroke. Won by Italy and Hungary this time. 

Mixed doubles in tennis. 

Everything else was in wrestling, archery, fencing, taekwondo, shooting and artistic swimming (syncharinised swimming)

So them being out made zero difference to us
Russian and Belarusian athletes are competing under AIN - the neutral banner
for sure! Although I wouldn't say it's overwhelmingly the reason (it's not as if the majority of medals Russia would have won are now under our belt, i think it's generally evenly spread)
Bread and circuses.


Meanwhile housing affordability at record lows
Gina would just pinch it
Legendary comment
you're right- they just won another gold. biting my teeth
We win a whole bunch of swimming golds and a small smattering of gold in other events, whilst the UK golds are in almost everything, they are competitive in most events

Love how we perform in Olympics but swimming is over represented in medals imo and we take full advantage of it
UK traditionally hasn’t done that great. They ramped up in the lead up to London in 2012 and the afterglow of that is starting to wear off now.
The whole country seems to be circling the drain at the moment.
Doping does that
And if WADA would grow some balls and actually their established processes for certain other countries that have long histories of juicing their athletes, the playing field might level out a bit more.....
The Soviets topped the gold medal table 6 times during their existence as a country.
welll, I mean we did beat them 4 years ago in Japan. And 8 years ago in Rio. idt it's as impactful as one mmight think!
Judging from the videos I'm seeing I reckon they will clean up at the Paralympics in the coming years
Is it possible to do so badly at something that it counts as a -1 gold
surprisingly, 3 of our gold medalists are from Penrith. If you think about it, if Penrith was it's own country, it would be in the top 20 LMAO
The objective rule is win gold medals. Assigning points isn’t more objective because you want it to be, that’s not how that works.
Only golds matter and it’s the history of the games. The original Olympics only the winner got a wreath
Americans are generally stupid, don't pay any attention to them.

They would have 50 bronze medals above 49 gold.
How is that more objective? By what logic is a gold only worth 50% more points than a silver?
I read this as a US Asian.
they have 9 gold-medal competitions ahead of them. If they get gold in 3, they'll beat us (assuming we won't get any more gold).

Considering that except 1 (ping pong China v JPN), all of these events have \~10 countries participating, I think it's unlikely they'll snag 3. If they get 2, we'll still be ahead since we have more silver.

Fingers crossed though!
Yeah but surely no country that has a gold medal favourite is not sending them. Sending the 3rd most athletes doesn't guarantee you anything unless you have quality athletes.
You get a gold medal if your country thinks you have a good chance of winning. To participate, every athlete must meet a certain "bar" set by the IOC. If many Australians are meeting that bar, by default that tells you Australia's doing amazing athletically compared to others :))
You do realise they had to qualify for the Olympics? S country doesn't just choose what they can send.
This isnt your monday briefing and nobodys giving you shit to convince your little brain.
If a country can only have a maximum of 2 athletes in an event does it really matter if you have 25 million or a billion citizens?
Not really close. Many countries are ahead in golds per capita, including St. Lucia, Dominica, and even New Zealand.
they're banned from participating in the olympics this year mate
Boy do I have some news for you about what Russia has been up too
We’re all on the team when it comes to the olympics
Just showing a lil bit of Aussie pride! It's something to bring us together, like most team sports.
Yes
100% man! We're a sporty nation, and it's amazing to celebrate that :))  
Pretty bloody inspiring for our kids too, who can look up and see what's possible. It heavily inspires a healthier lifestyle for them (and us), which is great for our nation overall!
[removed]
Revoke this guy's citizenship. With all the ills that infest the country right now you choose to shit on the one thing that could possibly give the people some pride and happiness ?
And yet here you are. Nobody forced you to read a clearly titled thread.
Speaking as a Pom, while it has been quite a 'bad' Olympics from a medal table perspective, we've not massively under-performed athletically. Sometimes whether you win a medal or not is just down to how the cards fall on the day, and it's not been our games in that regard.

Fifth is still a really good overall result, and I doubt many people will begrudge it if it means Australia having its best Olympics in decades and France coming fourth at its home games. I know GB coming third in 2012 and second in 2016 were moments of national pride, so it's nice to see other countries succeeding in the same way.
But wasn't this the case for Australia at the London games? We 'underperformed' because so many of the expected golds were silvers by not very much. I think the reason why it feels good this time is because most of 'our' favourites won. 
France is having his best medal count ever
Yeah the AIN delegation was small as the athletes had to denounce Russia to compete. I imagine most who relied on state sponsors to train etc couldn't afford to do that
Sooooo forced swimming
And even then, it’s a very small team made up of entirely Russians. There’s no Belarusians in that AIN Paris 2024 squad!
Nah she'd secretly mine it hollow while donating 0.01% of the profits to sport and the media would fawn over her. 😜
There's basically zero chance of us catching you now. Don't think we really even have any gold hopes left, never mind 4 of 'em.    
  
We're currently neck-and-neck with France on the medal table, so that's the only country we're still hoping to beat at this point.
It’s not so true this time around, we won 2 gold in skateboarding, 3 in Kayak, sailing, cycling, pole vault… only about half our golds are in the pool. We are fortunate that the swimming has a tonne of medal opportunities,  but we are doing well in a good variety of sports these days.
A friend used to say he was looking forward to the five 100m athletics sprints - running as normal, running backwards, on one leg, on all fours, and with your feet tied in a sack.
The UK has historically done quite well at the Olympics. At the early games it hovered somewhere around third, then between 1928 and 1992 it tended to come around tenth. In 1996 it slumped to 36th, which prompted the British government to put more money into sport via the National Lottery. This worked; in 2000 and 2004 it came tenth, and it's placed in the top four at the last four summer games.

The UK is also third in the all-time summer medal table and the only country to have won at least one gold at every games, although this is arguably due to geopolitics as much as sporting prowess; many countries have come and gone since 1896.
It's more down to the different, better funding model from the national lottery, not an afterglow. UK's improvement started building after a terrible 1996, which prompted the increase in funding, and started to really kick in in 2008, before London Olympics.  
  
I doubt we'll be finishing 2nd again for a long time (or ever), that was crazy, but I don't think anyone's expecting a return to 1996 levels of shit-ness now that we actually fund some athletes.
The USA has doped a lot in the past too. Let's not sugar coat that fact.
True. Statistically, Russia has highest doping numbers followed by Ukraine amd Belarus. Saw a stat somewhere yesterday.
Considering the Olympics are every 4 years, that's 24 years worth of Olympic dominance, which is a bit over 1/3rd of the lifetime of the Soviet Union. Not bad when you consider said lifetime also included things like WW2 (no Olympics) and a couple boycotts by major countries, including the Soviets.
That’s a hilariously frightening thought! The Republic of Penrith.
Don't we surprised. We didn't fluke a Three-peat.
Same for Tasmania.
That's rude
Well the difference between gold and silver can be fractions of a second.

Heck, it'd be interesting to do an overeall weighted medal table where gold is scored 100 points, and silver/bronze get a score scaled by their percentage of the gold time that they missed out by.
Just an example. The point is that we all use the same scoring system that spans all medals.
As a US African-Asian from Europe... Hehe
You know you have to qualify for the Olympics right? They're not sending Joe Blow from the local Parkrun. Everyone there is exceptionally high quality and eventually it becomes a numbers game if you're going to compare your medal tally as a whole vs countries that aren't even fielding half the amount of athletes

Measure it as a percentage of total medals or something to get an accurate comparison to compare over time
It does if u target areas where there isn't much competition ie skateboarding...

And to be extra controversial... women's event...

I'll show myself out..
Some are invited to increase diversity despite not qualifying.
You feel better now?
Yes it does. Imagine if the country only had two people to send for that event. They probably aren't going to be the best; compare that to a country with a million candidates that sends their best two.

You can easily try this out. Go to a shop and pick two random grapes and set them aside. Then buy a whole kilo of grapes and pick the two largest from that bunch. Generally the largest ones will be bigger than the two randomly picked ones.
Yes because a talent pool of 2 billion is a crazy advantage over 25 million.
New Zealand does well nearly every Olympics in the per capita stats.
Read before write.

https://www.npr.org/2024/08/09/nx-s1-5068021/olympic-medal-count-paris-gold-silver-bronze-total#:~:text=Tiny%20Australia%20is%20an%20Olympic%20superpower&text=It's%20Australia's%20best%20medal%20performance,medal%20for%20every%20570%2C000%20citizens.
I know. My point is they would probably be in the top 3 if they weren’t
Nope supporters and fans. Do not claim the athletes hard work as your own.
Lol why
Yep. Revoke his bong too.
They flair the Olympics posts too, so there's no excuse.
That’s very gracious
Agree with everything, good luck to the Aussies, they're well out in front, except... it would be pretty nice to outdo France at their own Olympics. I'm not above wishing for that. Especially since they baselessly accused the UK of doping when we did too well at previous recent Olympics.
There was also a neutrality test that athletes had to pass and most of them likely doubted their hopes in clearing that hurdle. Some even failed the test completely and were banned from Olympics selection for Paris. 

It could take until whenever Putin is kicked out of office for that dreaded, crimes-against-humanity war to finally end.
Like the 100m running but jumping over hurdles every few metres?
More of an egg and spoon race guy myself.   Or the more modern version the open beer relay.   Slam beer, open next, run to team mate, pass the “beerton”.  Spills are disqualified.
64 years at ‘around 10th’ followed by a massive slump in 1996 is not what I would personally define as doing quite well for a wealthy, well resourced nation like the UK.

Post WW2 results have been fairly average and only started to improve in the lead up and just post London 2012 as you can see below: 

	1.	1948 (London): 12th place (23 medals)
	2.	1952 (Helsinki): 18th place (11 medals)
	3.	1956 (Melbourne): 8th place (24 medals)
	4.	1960 (Rome): 12th place (20 medals)
	5.	1964 (Tokyo): 10th place (18 medals)
	6.	1968 (Mexico City): 10th place (13 medals)
	7.	1972 (Munich): 12th place (18 medals)
	8.	1976 (Montreal): 13th place (13 medals)
	9.	1980 (Moscow): 9th place (21 medals)
	10.	1984 (Los Angeles): 11th place (37 medals)
	11.	1988 (Seoul): 12th place (24 medals)
	12.	1992 (Barcelona): 13th place (20 medals)
	13.	1996 (Atlanta): 36th place (15 medals)
	14.	2000 (Sydney): 10th place (28 medals)
	15.	2004 (Athens): 10th place (30 medals)
	16.	2008 (Beijing): 4th place (47 medals)
	17.	2012 (London): 3rd place (65 medals)
	18.	2016 (Rio de Janeiro): 2nd place (67 medals)
	19.	2020 (Tokyo): 4th place (65 medals)
Yeah but Russia does it currently and often
Straight in with the whataboutism. Where the USA come from? This is an Aus sub.
Everyone dopes at the Olympics
Ukraine? Surely not! They are the goodies and Russia are the baddies.


If Russia dopes, and that's bad, and they're the baddies... then Ukraine does not dope at all because they're the goodies.
But true
Would very much like to see that represented on r/dataisbeautiful/

I wonder where we can get the data sets.
My point is that you can’t quantify it. They are categorical. The difference of 0.1s in a 100m race is years of training, genetics and hardwork. Your scale wouldve reduced it to only being worth 1%. By your logic, I’m halfway to a gold medal just by jogging over the line in 20 seconds.
Or just use the scoring system.
The people that stand on the podium for an olympic event make those that scrape by the qualifying time look like Joe Blow from Parkrun. Bolt wasn't just a pretty quick 100m runner who made the qualifying time then had a couple good meets. Browning the sprinter for Aus having never run a sub 10 would have to have the meet of his life to make the final but is still never winning Gold. Theres other sports where it's not quite this clear cut but Australia could easily have cut a substantial portion of its team with little to no risk of impacting its medal tally.
Why do you do random.


Pick the biggest grapes from 100 grams, 1 kg & 10kg.


At some point more candidates does not mean better.
Is it 40 times the advantage though?
Cause they'll have a state run doping system
They are our own. And they like to represent the country that gave them these opportunities. Don't be a nonce.
I bet you get invited to a lot of parties.
Because this is how Australian culture grows, it’s all we have as a nation. Critique that we don’t have a more well rounded culture (I agree), but don’t be mad at people for wanting some camaraderie over a shared interest.
Strange behaviour for a pommie sports fan
There are more distances in running too.
I've re-written my comment, as you added a lot to yours after I first replied.

The UK's record between 1948 and 2000 is broadly comparable to that of France, Italy, and Australia, so I wouldn't say that it 'traditionally hasn't done great', either in general terms or compared to other 'wealthy, well resourced nations'. Bear in mind that the Cold War created an intense Olympic rivalry between the Eastern Bloc and the USA, so those countries tended to dominate the top of the medal table at the time. The UK was a step below that, but still far above the bottom of the medal table – even in 1996, which was definitely a poor result, it came 36th out of 197.

We're now three games past London and the UK is still doing well, so I wouldn't say that the UK's performance only improved in the lead up to and 'just post' London 2012. The table shows a steady improvement from 2000 to 2012, which has been maintained in the three games since.
The USA is effectively allowing athletes who dope to compete. American athletes who took steroids and EPO were allowed to retire with their good names - and prize money - in tact in exchange for ratting out others.

[https://www.news.com.au/sport/olympics/americas-doping-hypocrisy-brutally-exposed-as-its-revealed-cheats-who-turn-rat-are-kept-hidden/news-story/b3400f5f577f1a6a9606e7f469c7e91a](https://www.news.com.au/sport/olympics/americas-doping-hypocrisy-brutally-exposed-as-its-revealed-cheats-who-turn-rat-are-kept-hidden/news-story/b3400f5f577f1a6a9606e7f469c7e91a)
You must only watch CNN /s
Huh? There’s vastly more potential athletes in a pool of billions than millions. More ‘candidates’ more competition, better athletes. It’s pretty simple.
in your example, more candidates would still mean better on average lmao
since there's more grapes in 10kg, there's a bigger variance. meaning more horrible, and more amazing athletes. increasing the chance of the best grape being better than the best one from the 100g bag
It’s 40 times the talent pool and someone a lot smarter than me can do the math on the specific numeric advantage that equates to in a practical setting like the Olympics. I wouldn’t say it’s 40 times the advantage, definitely less as there’s other crucial factors in play, but it is definitely a powerful superiority.
If you really want to know please message me on Monday and I can run a simulation of it for you and let you know.

I'll forget if you don't remind me tho.
Nah, it's not football so they don't *really* care is all.  
If this was the world cup, different story.
There are a total of 12 individual golds (per gender) handed out in running, including hurdles/steeplechase, marathon and walking.


In swimming, there are 15 including open water.
When the US government is running the doping scheme themselves and helping all their athletes systematically cheat, then it'd be approaching the same level of what the Russians were doing.
Who holds the spirit of the Olympics?
Must mean the Brits get grumpy every World Cup, then, aye?
They basically are, they just make up bullshit health reasons to cover it. Everyone has asthma apparently lol
They still are, and they do.
Everyone is doping. 
Lol if you consider rioting to be getting grumpy then yeah.
The US government doesn't control the testing or what drugs  are allowed.
It's hilarious that this is painted as a good thing.
It's hilarious that this is painted as a bad thing.
