Now we're done with the Friday venting, what's good in life? Got a new job? Have a date? Going out to a socially distanced restaurant? Climbing, sailing, riding or just working up a hard-earned thirst?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Aussie HELP in Amsterdam?

Please if you or any of your friends can help and is or will be in Amsterdam soon... I need someone that can attest my IDENTITY looking at my physical passport, that's all.

The task is to sign a Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) form so that I send it over mail for them to unblock my account. They locked it when I tried to transfer all my savings at once.

I am in Amsterdam now, and have been traveling since the end of JUNE. They did it just as I arrived in South Korea and had my next flight to Europe lined up. I was in Australia with Working Holiday visa that expired while I was in Seoul.

The bank has been incredibly unhelpful, initially telling me by phone that the only option was for me to go to a CBA branch and now after I filed a case with AFCA they kindly allowed me to to this over mail with this form they always had (it is routine).

This has been the worst month of my life. I already asked different friends for 1500 EUROS in total (that I obviously have to give back soon) to sustain myself while I am fighting for my money.

I am South American and need at least as much money to establish here as I brought with me when I did in Australia. Please I need an Aussie in Amsterdam to help!!!
A friend is buying an XY GT and that makes me smile.
Rode my horse for the first time. He hasn't been ridden much for years and tbh it was a bit stressful, took him out for a couple of hours and he walked up a mountain. I'm tired
No such thing as social distance
With all the (meme) spotlight Raygun is getting, I feel extra bad for Michelle Jenneke (of London 2012 pre run dance routine fame). She was actually running in good form this year, but stumbled on a terrible mistake and got a bad hamstring injury on her leg. She’s not even given a single ripple in the news circle because of it :-(
Anyone just watch the BREAKING in the Olympics? 

Can't believe they let "Ray Gun" use a pseudonym, yet still let her on stage with the Australian flag to embarrass our nation. Can we deport her?
I reckon you could go to any hostel and find an Australian.
I believe our embassy is in the Hague, surely they'd have Australians there but you'll have to scrape together like $70 AUD for the train fare that you can only pay online or with digital currency or a credit debit card. Could a friend or family spot you?


You said CBA chose to block your account for some reason, did you report online that you would be overseas?? I know Australia hates cash and the Netherlands hates cash even more but do you have any on you for food at least? Also do you have a wise money card at all? I set one up on my phone.  I would assume most of your accommodation would already be paid upfront as well. 


It's not clear why you tried to transfer a bunch of savings at once.
