We picked the wrong athlete to send 
Yesterday Raygun competed in multiple competitions over multiple rounds. From what I could see she didn’t receive a single point, from any judge, in any round, in any competition. While wearing a lawn bowl uniform.

The kangaroo hops were a nice touch

Makes you question the validity of the World Dance Sport Federation which seems to have secured Raygun a place in the Olympics, where she scored 1,000 points (?) and is ranked number one in Australasia
If doing a Bradbury is inexplicably winning, doing a Raygun is inexplicably participating.
I feel bad for all the other talented dancers in Australia that have way better moves that tuned in only for them to see that performance. Not being properly funded or accredited shouldn't mean Australia's best miss out on being selected to represent the country. 


On the plus side, her performance will be forever a part of our collective meme culture. 
i couldn’t stop cringing. no wonder she got 0s she was being a snake on the floor 😭
Feels like someone brought Kath day knight to the Olympics
How did she get no 1 qualifier for Oceania? The Sydney street breakers are better than her
Shove it up ya arse, Margaret!
I felt bad for her having to wear a fucking lawn bowls outfit
I have so many questions about the outfit.
Chris Lilley wishes he came up with the snake moves
She's going to be on sunrise in a week and hybpa in a month lmao
Eric the Eel moment.
I’m just watching this, can’t stop laughing.
But that would have been hard as hell to get up and keep going being faced with all those zeroes, so not going to hate on her 😆
That kangaroo jump 😬😬😬
I literally just said to my wife she learnt to break watching Summer heights high!

This is the first time I've watched an Olympic event and genuinely thought I could do that.
After watching the comp and Raygun specifically, this has aged well. She's even dressed like their PE teacher lol
Coordinator: It took me 8-years to beg, show, convince the OIC to include Breaking as a legitimate Olympic sport. 

Raygunn:
Those moves are like what cockroaches do when you spray them with can of Mortein 🦗
Her outfit was the biggest crime. What's the saying - fake it till you make it? You can suck at something but at least look cool doing it, get some style points from the crowd.  
  
I guess she was going for a deadpan type of humour / ironic outfit? but a mainstream olympic stage is definitely not the place for that.
there is no fucking way we sent a 36 y/o as our best breaker against the top 20 y/os of the world!? she needs to check her friends because clearly no one has had told her any form of constructive criticism
Did some gangster dis her fly girl?

 https://youtu.be/9sBHJVzDsWg?feature=shared
So everyone asking what happened. 

Breakdancing was not a sport prior to being put into the Olympics. 

Dance sport has been trying for years to get into the Olympics. (Basically ballroom dancing) For Paris they decided they wanted breakdancing. Breakdancers had never tried to get into the Olympics. They never wanted to. But they were in. 

They legit had to set up orginisations for the sport as they’d never existed before. Invent a scoring system. 

It’s utterly fucjed the sport was even introduced. Thankfully it’s not after this Olympics.
i mean it was definitely different
Here’s the “breakdance”
https://x.com/a_txcllctr87033/status/1821938402645958782?s=46

Not my video

Edit: appears it’s been taken down for copyright
I await the mockumentary she releases. This was satire at its finest.
I was honestly questioning whether she was some kind of comedian just trolling the competition or something. Actually hope that’s the case.
[deleted]
I can’t wait for Qantas to overlay a Indy version of “we can be heroes” to the footage of Raygun
I don't care what anyone else thinks. This show was fucking great.
I'm assuming they didn't have any qualifying competitions for this? While it's very funny to watch, it's also sad that someone would be chosen to represent their country and put in so little effort just to get a few laughs.
Also the name, all the names... I get they're bringing the culture into the games with the pseudonyms but jeez it feels lame.
I'm just glad she got back up. Was worried her last moments were being broadcasted to the world when she was flopping about. Ch 9 were building up to the event all night and couldn't have abandoned it quicker after that performance
My god why is she wearing a complete crickters unifrom right down to the white shoes.  This is SO embrassing.
I can only imagine she had some kind of connections allowing her to qualify
I watched the video and as a expert critic of breakdancing from watching my girls go through 15+ years of dance school this is what I observed.

When kids are young their moves are disjointed, cos they dance a bit like this.

Start Dance Move A. Stop.
Start Dance Move B. Stop.
Start Dance Move C. Stop.

It always looked a bit disjointed with an ever so small gap between moves as their brains transition from one move to the next. Fine, theyre young.

Pro dancers, as they move into their mid-late teens dance in one fluent series of moves moving instantly between them.

Start Dance Move A. Move B, Move C. etc

'Raygun' danced, in this Olympics dance, like a kid. Moving from one set of movements to the next in a clear set order. Then the next. They also look quite low energy too, (like someone too old perhaps) and have no sharpness or snap to them.

Check out one of my fave old school dance moves.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_6dHg_WfYbE

Sure its a male, but Raygun is in the Olympics, there should be SOME degree of comparison.
Puck you, OP
Ronald Raygun would have done better.
Absolutely, she was so cringe! The American who she competed against in the first round was unreal
She deserves gold for breaking out the Kangaroo hop in the Olympics

https://www.reddit.com/media?url=https%3A%2F%2Fi.redd.it%2F9u7jdycfynhd1.gif
She really is an absolute disgrace. She has the audacity to call this “art” and that her moves were her being “creative”. 

She had no idea how to breakdance. At all. Any girl in Australia who has done breakdancing is better than her. 

Very selfish. Narcissistic. She has embarrassed the sport and all her fellow B girls at the Olympics
We tell the year sevens to puck off.
Gold Medal performance.
Leon for LA 2028
GTFOH!!! Kangaroo Hops my ass she Sux!! It’s a complete embarrassment to the originators of HipHop!!!
This explains how she got
There[Travesty’: How the Olympics’ breaking farce was allowed to happen](https://www.news.com.au/sport/olympics/travesty-how-the-olympics-breaking-farce-was-allowed-to-happen/news-story/b6ff855d78232f4e6d7da82e7475bc64)
I think it's fair to say Asics isn't up to the task of fitting out Skateboarders, BMXers or Breakers. Australia needs a secondary sponsor for these categories. Would feel kind of robbed going up against teams kitted out Nike or Nike SB.
i just dont understand....you could go to any school in the western suburbs of Sydney and find a high school kid that is better than Raygun...i dont know anything about dancing, but I know second hand embarrassment, and mine is off the charts!
if I was cruel, I'd say maybe Raygun got lost and was in Paris 2 weeks early?
She is the break dancing version of A Little Bit Alexia from the Canadian show Schitt’s Creek. Watch the till the end!  https://youtu.be/t_kOk5xvGUE?feature=shared
Is this where Australians learn to breakdance?
Anyone here know about the qualifying  processes? No
Anyone here know what the judges criteria was? No
Anyone here know how the scoring system works? No
Anyone here know what the judge had to say? No
I’ll smash that motherfucker with one little fkn move
Can we just let the blackface comedian's legacy die pls
I’ve read all the comments, without seeing the video, and thought “oh it can’t be that bad”. 

How incredibly wrong I was. It’s woeful. 

Some people are saying conciliatory things like she’s tried her best. I can’t see it where the trying part is, seems like a skit or prank from a comic actor. 

Surely there’s some bright and talented breaking star elsewhere in Australia who could have competed?

Edit - I genuinely hope she has good support around her. Will be a tough week ahead enduring all this.
I sincerely need someone to explain to me what happened here. There is no possible way she is a professional dancer of any kind, let alone Olympic-worthy? I genuinely need to know.
My cat dances better than her
https://y.yarn.co/3bd5da6e-f6fb-4929-9ccc-a844b26febdf_text.gif
It was kinda like when you see the wildcards in athletics and swimming only they are literally there to represent their country and have fun
Perfect analogy
We finally got our own Eric the Eel.
I thought it looked more like a dying fish flopping around but YMMV :P

I also spotted the "kangaroo hop" (usually performed by kids under 10) and "the sprinkler" (which I haven't seen anyone not full of alcohol performing recently). It was... interesting. People are going to remember this, I'll give her that.
Cringing so hard but couldn't stop watching 😭😭
Honestly thought she was using some Celeste Barber moves
Honest answer is access to money/funding. You need money to qualify for the Olympics because of the travel and time off involved over a 3-4 year cycle. If you’re not being funded it becomes extremely difficult to qualify for anything, even if you’ve got the skill.
>How did she get no 1 qualifier for Oceania? The Sydney street breakers are better than her

We need to get a fund going for them if break dancing is in the next summer Olympics.
I don't think she had to.
John Howard's favourite tracksuit when he was pm.
She chose the outfit. Wow.
Dressed like a high school PE teacher
I was thinking more like a Cricketer
i look forward to sam pang's merciless critique
Eric the Eel came from an impoverished country with little to no swimming pools or competition. Not one of the wealthiest nations in the world with a tonne more deserving talent at least.
Didn’t Eric win? At least Eric won. “Ray Gunn” should not be allowed back in the country. She has brought shame to our nation.

She should be left to dance on the Parisian streets for coins and work her way up back from the streets in order to gain our respect.
Eddie the Eagle more like.
Legit looks like someone's mum decided to have a go
Happy cake day!

So it's a one off? Australia won't have to be embarrassed again at the next Olympics?
I actually wish the Olympics was broader. What's so bad about breaking being included? Every sport at some point needed to come up with a system and rules. Dance is no exception. I'm a little disappointed it won't be continuing. Seeing Ballroom included would be absolutely awesome.
Thought it would have been a better fit for Tokyo, there is a long history of breaking in Japan
Little snippet from Reddit which is enough… she is getting absolutely roasted.

https://www.reddit.com/r/funny/s/HIxNQVEtTs
Looks like it's been copyrighted already
I thought it was Chris Lilley, the low res video had me thinking it was meant to be a young dude with a mullet
Raygun and Polyforce could have been a solid duet
Dr. Rachel Gunn should stick to academia because she isn't any good at breakdancing.
SHH? Too right, but not for that.
Now those guys are freakin breakdancers. Such fluidity with their bodyweight althletisism. And that's at least 17 years ago.
Also most of the Asics uniforms are kind of naff in general.
Just try having a laugh mate rather than trying to find issues with everything
Agreed. Fuck that piece of shit.
I don't feel that bad for her, 

It's the dream of millions to compete in the Olympics, millions who are more talented than her. It's a zero sum game. Her taking that spot is denying that spot for literally hundreds of more deserving B-girls. 

She comes from a place of extraordinary privilege. Who the hell has the time/money/privilege to do a phD on breakdancing?
What if this is like a Sacha Baron Cohen type thing where Raygun is her character and is filming all of this for a hilarious movie to come out in a year or 2. Got the whole world duped right now and is on the verge of being a huge movie star now.
Eh, she had her moments but what she lacked was speed and snappy movements. Very fixable stuff. It's often the difference between awkward white guy dancing and looking good.
I mean... hard to believe she hasn't had an honest critique from a single person going from housewife to the largest, most professional sporting competition in the fucking world. 

For that, she deserves every bit of criticism she receives (sans threats and insults). It's like a fat dad who plays basketball once a month and has a masters degree in arcade games shows up to the NBA AllStars game. 

The plus side is, as an American, we can post memes of her every time Australians try and talk about our imaginary rivalry on social media from now on.
Some reports are claiming she was a ballroom dancer, there is no way a trained dancer of any kind would not know those moves would look ridiculous. She doesn't move like someone who has ever seriously studied dance or has any natural talent.
A lot of athletes at the Olympics are amateurs who don't get paid to compete (though they are usually better than this...)
My dog ‘breakdances’ after every bath.
I genuinely thought it was her and was enjoying everyone's reactions thinking this was serious. Turns out it's just someone with a doctorate in knowing how these things are judged.
I don't know if it's what qualified her for the Olympics but she did win the [2023 Oceania competition](https://www.worlddancesport.org/Competitions/Ranking/Oceania-Championship-Sydney-Adult-Breaking-1vs1-B-Girls-60318).
It won’t be LA is doing Flag Football instead
I dunno, the other athletes didn't, but she might have been told she had to wear the uniform
I think performing naked has fallen out of practice
Then to be honest I'm all for it
And asking Tom Gleisner if he knows what breakdancing is.
He did win his heat... Because the other competitors intentionally false started to get disqualified
Yup!

I actually feel really embarassed for her. Break dancing has been her passion her entire life. And after being forced to create structure for the ‘sport’ she’s mocked on a world wide stage.
I do too but currently they limit the number of sports so watching a sport have to invent rules and scoring to go, while my sport is in and our every few years is frustrating.
I think it’s too young honestly. Like I’m glad surfing is now in the Olympics, but it’s only recently that it makes sense to have it in
This is a good thread too (with a different snippet):  https://www.reddit.com/r/olympics/s/CipiomPvxT
Thanks for the context. The thread was very confusing until I saw this. I thought "she" was another Chris Lilly character from the video that I somehow missed.
Anyone got a working link? I want to see!
Protecting sales for the commemorative DVD obviously
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-GZHY8YlNCU
Hey, as someone with a PhD, it's nice to see at least *one* academic having a hobby or passion outside the ivory tower.

Edit: I meant having *time* to have a hobby or passion outside academia, not that academics don't have hobbies/passions at all (they certainly do!).
Mind the crust of Cheezel dust on your phone
Oh well when you put it that way, blackface is fine then ❤️
I guess this is one of the reasons why I don't feel too bad expressing how weird her performance was. She knew she couldn't win so it seems like she decided to treat it like a joke so she makes it looks like she decided to come last on purpose and then will probably lecture people on how the Olympics stifle people's ability to express themselves in dance when she gets back home. 

But by doing that, she's taken the place of some up and coming girl who is a lot more talented and would have at least tried to win. It just sucks. Money speaks and I guess not many people without sponsors can afford to travel around to international dance competitions to get her ticket to Paris (which you also need money for.)
Who's spot did she take? If someone else were able to qualify instead they would have.
She didn't pick herself.
I was with you until the last paragraph 

We are complaining because she looked liked an average Australian trying to breakdance. You know what an average American looks like trying to breakdance?
Housewife? She’s a college professor and has a PhD. Why did you assume she was a housewife…?
K bro
She 100% does not move like anyone who has ever danced in their lives. *Any* kind of dancing.
Ballroom dancers ARE trained dancers
If she has a doctorate in knowing how these things are judged, then getting zero points would have to be somehow deliberate, right? You can't know exactly how something works, then do the total opposite by accident.
For those of you wondering here the final qualifying battle: https://youtu.be/MorhA98eK7M?si=VI1e33CQGbEyW2QG
Raygun definitely paid to win that clown of a competition. If you look at  videos of all the other contestants from that competition, there ain’t no other way besides paying the judges that Raygun got anything but last place. Forget first place.
If you look at all the prior performances - she doesn't come close. Smells something random...!
>doing Flag Football instead

I did not know that. That's going to be interesting. I've watched "professional" flag football on YouTube and it's a pretty decent spectator sport. It's faster than regular American football.
meanwhile i'm mildly amused that they have chosen to remove 'dancing' from the name of the event
It should have been like Skateboarding.

  
They've had the X-games and heaps of different international and local events and competitions, and all kinds of legendary faces advocating for it.

When Tokyo Olympics came by, Skateboarding was the easiest and natural addition.
There's a replay on the 9now app
Well the problem is it isn't a hobby or passion outside the ivory tower, she's there because the break dancing is her academic field...  Lame as fuck.  

So for everyone who didn't get through to post grad, this is the type of thing where the funding is going instead.
The Professor Cam McEvoy would like a word.
Donno what you're talking about (as someone also with a PhD). If you've got a doctorate and you don't have a hyper obscure hobby you're in the minority.
I can spin my head on the floor and flop around like a fish. Raygun was so bad it actually feels like a joke. Breaking wasn't very interesting even with the women who were good. Rythmic gymnastics and Artistic Swimming are dancing as well but actually entertaining and extremely difficult.
Technically it's not blackface cuz Maoris aren't black
Beat someone could Molly  in the final.

I don't know how much the judges integrity is worth, a blind emu could tell the other girl (Molly) was clearly better. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MorhA98eK7M
Lol where are you getting that from? I'm referring to the oddly plentiful amount of Australians on social media who were convinced we were in direct competition for gold medals.

The average fat ass from Alabama didn't dance their way through multiple competitions into the Olympics. 😂
Why would quite literally anybody on the entire planet assume she was a PhD?
Yeah, and I don't believe she was ever a trained ballroom dancer so.....
I have a personal theory that she did do it on purpose, at least towards the end. Like her first opponent, first round wasn't good, but it kind of looked like she was trying. Her second round was super short like she just threw in the towel knowing she couldn't win. By the time she got to her 2nd opponent, 2nd round without a single point awarded, she seemed to start doing a lot more of the \*ahem\* artistic(!?) dying fish style flopping around on the floor. By the time she got to the 3rd opponent she just looks like she decided if she was going to come last she was going to make it look "deliberate" and completely abandoned trying to be serious and started jumping around like a kangaroo, windmilling her arms wildly, posing like the thriller, and doing the sprinkler.
I am *truly* so confused. This genuinely looks like when my kids were toddlers and they’d say, “mom, watch this” 56 times and then they’d do what they thought breakdancing was in their 4 year old toddler brain. I’m not kidding, I cannot fathom how these “dancers” are considered even mediocre, let alone championship, let alone *WORLD OLYMPIC* worthy…. I sincerely feel like I’m being pranked???
What the actual hell. The opponent was clearly better. Something dodgy happening to get to the Olympics.
She is an ex-ballroom dancer. It’s interesting that someone from their ranks would win a breakdancing competition held by a dance sport organisation. 
You won't be seeing any 37 year old professors of Intersectional Dancing in flag football, I'll guarantee you that much.
The NFL is also heavily pushing their stars to compete. I expect a bunch will choose other flags to play under so there should be decent teams for American Samoa, Tonga, Canada etc
Do you mean vert? Because it’s been in for a while now
Her dissertation was on break-dancing. Her actual field is cultural studies...that's a legitimate field of study.
I was making a tongue-in-cheek joke about academia's work culture as a whole. I literally received an email from an older supervisor of mine about a paper we are writing who still had the audacity to say "no weekends or close of business for academics" (yikes). 

I can attest that I do have a hobby, thankfully, and am a professional visual artist and scientific illustrator outside my PhD, although I have left academia now so it is a moot point. But I would agree that many (usually younger) academics thankfully do have a lot of interests and hobbies outside of their research :)

Edit: words
Neither of them would have been close to competing in any of the olympic rounds.
It's not her fault what the judge decided. She didn’t steal anything if they made the choice that she was the winner. 

She stated she tends to get points for creativity so I'm assuming that's the main part of why she won. I think this is probably the problem with something like breaking in the Olympics. It's a creative field with an athletic bent. But since it's the Olympics people don't want the random moves someone invented that get points for originality in other competitions. They want the athletic side.

Scoring for our competition should have favoured the athletic side. But there's no changing that now.
Thank you for your knowledge and the context
Seriously this is the best we can do two white girls, molly is better I agree but I know black & white girls who could wipe the floor with these two. 
The voting was rigged.
Hahaha the average fatass from Alabama 

Yeah alright but when twerking enters the Olympics, and come on folks we know it's coming, fatass Alabama better have some magic in her hips
Not what was said
Housewife is a bit of an assumption these days too. I don’t think I know any.
I went down the rabbit hole. There are some theorizing that this her protesting because she didn't support adding breaking (btw I learned that break dancing was the name given by the media) to the olympics. Of course, this is ridiculous. What's also ridiculous, is how much time I've spent on this lol
To be included, a pursuit has to occur in a number of different countries.  Gridiron barely gets out of the box there. 

On this basis I want to see AFL at Brisbane 2032.
I meant in an 'official' capacity for the Olympics. Tokyo 2020 was the the debut for Street and Park.
Oh that narrows it down.  Like all culture/cultures?  Or the breakdancing stuff listed on her CV?  

*(I say this as someone with at least one degree that is very close to the cultural studies wheelhouse).
I get the sentiment. I replied because while the work attitude is kinda cooked. I've yet to encounter a cohort with as broad a range of weird hobbies as academics. Your initial comments runs the risk of presenting academics as stuffy and not the raving pack of weirdos they often are.

I suspect it's a function of being on campus for long periods of time.
With any god damn luck the nukes will have wiped us out long before that happens.
That was a really good comeback, man. You're allowed to laugh.
I would have thought a progressive nation like Australia had legalized house, human marriage by now. My mistake. 😒
Host nations get to pick a few events regardless of those other criteria.

So yeah, AFL at brisbane is entirely possible.
It could be! I don’t think they expect it to be back, but it’s just an exhibition. 

Some of these exhibitions feel like real Olympic sports (eg surfing) and some I’m just like wtf
There are enough foreign athletes in the NFL that a few countries should be able to put together teams, particularly if you throw rugby players etc into the mix, although I doubt any will be competitive against the Americans.

The real power move for Australia would be to replace handball with proper Australian playground handball
Oh yeah I think skating, surfing and climbing are all in the same spot where I’m waiting for them to officially be full sports. Think they’re all exhibitions rn but the success makes me think they’ll be permanent.

Skating for me is just if they’ll add more events. Surfing I was questionable about but the success this year (one of the photos of the Olympics) and LA + Brisbane for the next 2 makes me think it’ll stick
Yes she would have studied a lot about all cultures to get to that academic level.
Oh we have, I just don’t know if I’ve seen any
Nah, we should pour money into promoting AFL throughout Oceania.  We might have to annex NZ to get it going properly but they're quick learners and I believe AFL has some amateur support in the USA.

But yeah, replacing the regular handball with a tennis ball would be maybe more affordable.
Heh...  Is that right?  Ok reddit, Jeebus...  

*Sub clearly doesn't know what cultural studies is.
Be the change you wish to see in the world.
