
If you give your money to a guy that looks like that, low testosterone is the least of your worries
This guy has been at this same stunt for over a decade now, always ends in everyone being ripped off and him up on criminal charges. He’s not going to change until they literally put him in the slammer and throw away the keys.
buy to inject off facebook. what could go wrong?
> "His exact words were, 'You'll have big coconut balls. Your sex drive will be through the roof, and you'll feel a million bucks.'"
It’s always the ones you most suspect
TRT definitely won't make your balls bigger, that should've been a red flag. 

It is something that should be better regulated and accessed in Australia though in my opinion to keep dodgy operators like this out of business.
“Checkmate”

Probably should’ve been “Cheque, mate”
But he looks so trustworthy...
Face tats. The mark of trust and excellence.
First port of call should always be to an endocrinologist.

Mine diagnosed low testosterone, but because he’s not a hack, he didn’t prescribe replacement T since it’s not a production issue (for me). Instead I take medication that stops the conversion of T to E2, which in turn has meant I can continue to rely on my body’s natural production.

A lot of these clinics take a “throw shit at a wall and see what sticks” approach, which often means they need to be reactive to side effects, even though their business model doesn’t allow for the response time that entails.
Oh, I first read that title like the doctor was stealing testosterone from these men, am I stupid?
Who'd trust a flop that looks like that lol?
You know what, if someone was stupid enough to give this dumb fuck money o don’t care
Buying hormones off the internet, wcgw?
Standard issue "flog"
Call 1800 doctorb - the b is for bullshit.
'Cause, yeah, facial tattoos just *scream* trustworthiness.
Shit like this annoys me. 

Hormone replacement therapy is fucking great for people who need it. Trashy articles like this that start with some dumb fuck who got it prescribed by “climax clinics” that he heard about from his local gym and then when he’s diagnosed with some heart condition he reckons he knows what caused it? 

How about not speculating because you’re not a doctor and not very bright. 

More men in their later years should be looking into this as a way to increase their quality of life at a time when you’re finally retired and looking to be active with grand kids and travel and shag your golden years away. 

But just like medicinal cannabis and ozempic it just seems to get that fear monger treatment because it can be abused like every other substance known to man. 


I wish we were more progressive and more open to things like this instead of using clowns like this dude as an example.

Maybe if the access to this wasn’t so stigmatised then people would go to a legit endo for treatment instead of a flog at the local gym.
I use an online testosterone clinic, it’s worked fantastic for me

I specifically use the clinic because I want proper health guidance and reliability of product, crazily you can just buy testosterone off Facebook marketplace place and it’s pretty much cheaper but then you’re trying to understand your own bloodwork which is not an easy feat. The online clinic uses the same standards as my GP when it comes to being able to prescribe TRT, I was actually turned away from the clinic at first for what in America would be considered Hypergonadism.

While the online clinics are probably more likely to have less thorough operators, This just sounds like a scam.
Damn bro, the online manosphere has left men so insecure they’re an easy grift.
If you were buying shady T from that guy I blame the victims


Checkmate eye tatts always scream quality.


This should also be his legal defence , they should have known better
this is just gender affirming care for the cis but more steps
I thought it was common knowledge that you shouldn’t inject shit in your body, that you order online
Just buy UGL for $85
Most manly thing I have heard a bloke doing in a while.
At some point it’s hard to feel bad for silly people who are so easily scammed. It sucks for the people that got swindled but cmon man.
Sorry but no sympathy at all. Feel free to downvote.. but some should know how to read the room
A face you can trust
It certainly indicates his trustworthiness.
Yep. Also, perhaps your criteria for selecting a person involved in the provision of medical services should include something other than "he sounds like one of the boys". FFS you're 60 years old, get your shit together. 

But I'm honestly kinda conflicted on this one and feel sorry that this guy is unfortunate/vulnerable/gormless eoungh that people like face tattoo guy can take advantage of him
Its not even "low testosterone", they're just gymbros convinced that since it's the male sex hormone, then more of it will make them manlier.
Cracked me up lmao
Check mate!
Not even a guy which makes it even funnier. NEVER USE YOUR OWN SUPPLY!
This an interesting implication that the consequences for crime does not affect their opportunity cost and fines can be reframed as cost of business albeit a shady one.  
  
 If what you say is true that he is a repeat offender that has doe similar scams in the past, it appalling  that the law did not send him to jail or financially reimburse affected victims out of the persons own pocket for negatively affecting people.   


Perhaps it shows that laws and regulations need an update.
Surely nothing!
Didn’t read the article, huh?
The real doctor would have said "enlarged testicles not dissimilar to a seed of Cocos nucifera".
thought testerone supplements actually shrink the balls haha, hence all the juiced bodybuilders with peanuts.
Big balls and TRT do not go together. That claim and the horrid face tattoos would have me nope the fuck away from this bullshitter before handing him a cent.
Gay men/straight women/penis owners: is there an advantage to having “big coconut balls”?

Are they extra attractive or special in some way?

They just seem like an encumbrance to me.
Funny thing is I’m on trt nuts the size of hazel nuts now as exogenous test shrinks the balls as they have one less job to do!
Good nutrition and exercise should also achieve this. You may need to lower coconut ball expectations though.
Which is hilarious, because testosterone supplementation can often result in testicular shrinkage as testosterone converts to oestrogen when in excess and levels are very hard to regulate.
Why on earth would you also want bigger balls?
Actually, at a properly managed *therapeutic* dose with the appropriate supplementary *medication*, testicle shrinkage can be avoided.

Better access to this kind of care alone would, ironically, destroy the business model of many of these clinics.

It would also push men back to actual endocrinologists, which would be so much better for them, as sometimes it’s not as simple as “T low, take T” which they are trained to look for.
Is hormone therapy not available to men who actually have medically low T levels? I assumed it was people who didn't actually need it going to dodgy guys like this because they were misinformed.
Probably very literal.


> Hormone replacement therapy is fucking great for people who need it. Trashy articles like this … etc

It’s a useful and necessary article, well researched as *Background Briefing* always is -

> Professor Wittert says improving men's health literacy is a better way to deal with the popularity of online clinics than having regulators close down individual providers.
Can you really? Have just spent a few mins trying various terms and doesn't look like you can buy test from Facebook marketplace
Yeah, they should just be tanning their scrote like Tucker Carlson said to.

/s
The people downvoting are triggered by your comment LMFAO
But note that there were genuine docs involved so don’t just blame the victims as per usual -

> Ahmed Sabet, the doctor who prescribed testosterone lozenges to Jamie, has since given an undertaking to the Australian Health Practitioner Regulatory Agency (AHPRA) to no longer practise medicine in Australia and subsequently surrendered his medical licence.

>He did not respond to questions from Background Briefing.

>Dr Cody Morris, who prescribed injectable testosterone for Jamie and Sam, had conditions on his licence related to the prescribing of testosterone and Human Growth Hormone (HGH) before his licence was suspended in April this year.

>He is also facing charges in Queensland of supplying and trafficking in dangerous drugs in relation to another TRT clinic called Krownd.

>He did not respond to questions when contacted by Background Briefing.
Honestly sounds like less steps from what I've heard from trans men
😂
Dr. Octor, Medical Professional
*Checkmate.*
I haven't had a good look but he's probably got loyalty written on there somewhere
Compound V?
I have seen a lot of guys around attributing all their problems to low testosterone (without actually getting their levels checked).
>… they're just gymbros convinced that since it's the male sex hormone, then more of it will make them manlier.

Read the article and you’ll find this is not always so -

> "He said, ‘I'm going to make you huge,'" Sam recalls.

>"And I said, ‘Mate, I don't want to be huge. I want my pain to go away.'"
The laws are in place, the problem is the police. They won't arrest someone who has stolen money where there's a contractual arrangement in play, they'll tell you "it's a civil matter, you have to sue them yourself".

You can steal millions (not exaggerating) this way before the police might finally get around to charging you with fraud.
Doesn't sound as exciting if put this way though.
*Results may vary.
I dunno, I can imagine this said by a Brazilian in an animated way that is way sexier and more attractive than just coconuts.
Testosterone supplements are mostly BS. 

I’ve done a few test cycles, injecting higher than trt dosages will make your balls shrink enough to be kind of noticeable to yourself, but they don’t get that small.

It can be entirely negated by taking HCG while you’re on a cycle and maybe an aromatase inhibitor if your blood work shows your oestrogen getting a bit out of control.

Other than that, the claims above are all true. You’ll put on a tonne of muscle and lose fat at the same time, feel a million bucks, look great, perform like you’re in your early 20’s, recover from any workout overnight and always be at your best mentally and physically. When you come off cycle you’ll lose about half of the size you put on (which still leaves you way bigger than where you started) then you PCT back to your baseline.
Eh, you could run HCG alongside your cycle and your balls will stay the same.

He could be talking metaphorically?
Big balls like big boobs are fun to play with if that's your thing. 






Like most things related to men and their junk it seems to only matter to straight dudes though. Ain't no gay dude turning down some action because the balls aren't big enough and I doubt any chicks care about the balls at all. Most women I know have very little interest in engaging with the scrotum. 
Reminds me of a song.
Correct me if I am wrong, but have you just basically signed up to some sort of dosage of this stuff for the rest of your life? 

Not taking the piss just genuine curiosity.
> Good nutrition and exercise


Nah, too hard. Let me pay thousands for some pills.
Bigger balls isn't a desired effect from TRT nor something that one should expect. As soon as someone introduces exogenous testosterone into their system their body stops producing it naturally, since there's a surplus. The side effect of that is smaller balls. Hence why old mate saying it'll make his balls big would be a red flag.
Agreed, it certainly shouldn't be making them *bigger* though. And yes 100% proper access would mean endocrinologists get involved instead of these clinics.
yeah some guys decide they need testosterone and work backwards from there. the really dumb ones literally [pull all-nighters to tank their levels before blood tests](https://www.reddit.com/r/Testosterone/search?q=all+nighter&restrict_sr=on&include_over_18=on&sort=relevance&t=all). but there are plenty of "men's clinics" that only exist to prescribe testosterone to men who were correctly turned away by endocrinologists
It is, but the level you need to get to is so low that you are almost dead by the time mainstream will even look at you. 

Honestly, they will never get this genie back in the bottle. They need to look at loosening the reigns a little on both what is considered "low" and allowing doctors to prescribe it without fear of the more serious repercussions. If they stick to what is clinically valid, that's great. 

But what is regarded as clinically valid needs to change.
> medically low T levels

 T Levels can be much like any other levels, That is that the "baseline" is a median of the population and some people are outliers. A small few can have "normal" levels but their previous baseline would be higher and the drop to "normal" can cause issues.

 Same thing with people presenting with Low T levels when its their baseline and not an issue medically.

 Your 100% on the money that its unlikely anyone like that was sourcing out Mr dodgy though.
The article explains if you read it.
I’m sure Tate Peterson has a vitamin stack to sell them.
It is though right? Flex 💪🤣
Dr. Octor. MBA. Medical Bullshit Artist
Better or worse than Dr. Acula?
I like how he has Checkmate tattooed on his face. That guy would lose to a 6yo playing Checkers.
Wait until they get into their '60s.
They're really hard to check and expensive unless you have a good reason to give a doctor concerns.
That is a good point! It does appear that effort occurs when the crime is too large or noticeable to be ignored. 

It does sound like a behaviour and cultural problem. Reminded me of the news post here months ago of a woman who got killed by their bf despite asking cops in multiple stations for help but got turned away as "they could not do anything to help her". 

Assumed she is doing it for attention which goes back to previous point of the culture within police is not helpful nor will they attempt to improve it. 

The typical excuse is "internal investigation did not see the need to fix the issue". 2nd excuse is reduced funding or budget to manage operations. This does mean certain crimes get higher priority which would be simple and obvious.

Does remind that business and governments would a code of conduct policy that is written evidence of behavioural standards and ideally used to shape cops into more effective and helpful to the public in dealing with stuff. 

Unfortunately it means nothing if news among others if news like this keep popping up. 

Appreciate the perspective
That's correct. That's why we have a civil court system, and ways for people to seek financial restitution through the legal framework.

It is not the police's responsibility or duties to be debt collectors for private debts.
It’s not a question of where he grips it it’s a simple question of weight ratios. A five-ounce bird could not carry a one-pound coconut.
I hear you but I'm kinda excited anyway now.
As a straight chick, I absolutely couldn’t care less about their size. Though if we take it to extremes, I’d prefer grapes over watermelons any day.
It would be a good band name!
Yeah basically. To try sum up why -I  did 4 years of 5pm/ 4am night shift 5 days a week, which absolutely ruined me went from 84kg with abs to 120 something. Was still eating clean and working out 4-5 times a week weight piled on and with it had other low t symptoms. Quit that job spent 3 years fixing my sleep habits, working on dropping the fat, eating the right things for hormone health, taking zinc, d3, fish oil, magnesium also other “test booster” supplements still had a bit of a belly but put that down to being 45 now and enjoying a beer or 6 on the weekends. Still felt run down, depressed, no interest in dating or making an effort even. So got tested and lo and behold my levels were clinically low, so jumped on first cream now a twice weekly injection I do at home and feel like I’m mid 20s again. Well until I strain something then it’s nope definitely mid 40s haha

Edit should add was my last resort I spent 3 years trying to feel better and just didn’t happen so yeah jumped on the treatment.
A 12 week test cycle is like $250.
As long as it changes based on medical evidence. Unfortunately there's a lot of misinformation floating around about this topic.
🤣
You got checked, mate!
They're easy as fuck to check it's a simple blood test you can get done at any pathology lab and not expensive (unless the price has gone up a lot in the last 10 years), it's also very easy to get your GP to write you up for a testosterone level check.
Theft and fraud are crimes
Hey, no one is gripping my bird 
r/unexpectedmontypython
Isn't it important what type of bird it is?
I just knew this thread was going to be funny.
And how large were your nuts after 12weeks?
Agreed. 

I think that one of the biggest problems is people are conflating the level required for inclusion on PBS-funded treatment, and the level required for optimisation.  

There is nothing wrong with optimising your hormones.  But when you are a man, you are just supposed to bite down and bare it.
Contractual agreements where one party doesn't adhere to the terms of agreement is a civil issue, not a police issue.
Only the country of origin, maybe an African swallow can handle bigger coconuts
Slightly smaller than normal. Barely noticeable.
Careful now. That's considered racist on reddit
 
Meanwhile I agree. The Asian swallow is too small.
Heck, yeah I forgot there’s people that don’t like migratory birds
