
What the fuck did i just read, LNP cunts changing boots?
That gold boots look tacky AF. 
gina wasn't stealing enough money from us by digging stuff up out of the ground, so now she has an overpriced clothing line? fmd.
Crazy to see that boots are becoming political.
Bloody shame, they have moved manufacturing to a china now for Rossi boots.
And Andrew Forrest owns Akubra Hats
Yep sounds like we are importing stupidity from the US.
Goes well with the ugly Olympic outfit.
How exactly does she steal anything?

She pays the tax and royalties that the government charges. If you think the levels are too low, it’s the governments fault, not hers.
Everything is political and always has been. Clothing always makes a statement.


Did you not read the article you posted?
Why are you such a big supporter of the... lady?

She spends millions on accountants to avoid as many taxes and royalties as she can. 

Personally I would prefer those millions went to the ATO than say PWC or EY where it will be moved off shore and be of no advantage to Australians. 

This poor delicate flowers "commitment" to the arts and or sport is predicated on whether or not she can control what is said/displayed.

Sorry, this individual has NO redeeming characteristics.
Yeah, cause rich people and massive corporations don’t influence government decisions that impact them at all…
She pays people to mine the resource that by Australian law belongs to the government and then claims huge amounts of tax concessions on things like fuel and equipment which cost the taxpayer billions per year. 

Her companies then utilise tax loopholes to the point where some of them pay less tax than people earning minimum wage. 

She inherited the companies from her father and has spent the majority of her life fighting against progressive tax policies and politicians who are a threat to her insane profits. She funds far right think tanks, is a major sponsor to political parties and is one of the major players in Australia’s political climate. 

At the end of the day, the only thing she offers in the extraction of minerals in Australia is the companies that are set up to do the job. 

The government could change the laws tomorrow, make it so that she only receives 10% of the profits and the rest go into a national wealth fund similar to what Norway has and she would still be a billionaire. 

There is absolutely no reason that the government should be paying her to extract minerals that it owns the rights to and then getting nothing back from her in tax. 

She is a parasite.
username checks out
“Stealing” is against the law. Minimising tax in accordance with the law, which EVERY company in the country does, isn’t. 

What do you expect to happen? That she’ll suddenly volunteer to pay more because people have a whinge?
Yo forgot to mention that she's a massive cunt.

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2012-09-05/rinehart-says-aussie-workers-overpaid-unproductive/4243866
That boot leather taste in your mouth must be addictive I reckon.
When she pays less tax than I do? Hell yes I think she should pay up, volunteering is irrelevant. 

The amount of carrying on she does given the mineral rights she has essentially been gifted, tax breaks she has demanded and disrespect she has shown the Australian people as a whole, is pathetic and the actions of a petulant child.

The accounting loop holes she takes advantage of, hover on the edges of legality. 

She pays companies like PWC to minimize the taxes - are you at all familiar with what PWC partners have done in recent years with respect to the Australian tax system?

Given your apparent "black or white" perspective on this I'm going to take a stab in the dark and say you are a troll, albeit not a very effective one. I don't think I shall engage with you further.
Laws don't equal morality 
Let's not mention all the billionaires that are stepping up and saying people of their income levels should be taxed more, while (and frequently at the same time) using their unethically amassed wealth (as they recognise it to be now - proof that the lepoard can change his shorts? Discuss...) to fund ways out of poverty and hardship for as many as they can, k? Attabot...
Maybe you’re just not crying hard enough?
“Gina Rinehart’s Hancock Prospecting paid $1.7 billion over the five years. As she owns the company – it is not publicly listed on the ASX like Fortescue – Gina Rinehart may be Australia’s biggest individual taxpayer.”

https://michaelwest.com.au/ranking-australias-billionaires-as-taxpayers/
Maybe you were never taught that it's OK to do so.
"This, of course, is a guess because we simply can’t tell what happens to income once it gets into the hands of any of the billionaires, or their corporate vehicles that is. Old wealth does not have to disclose at all.". 

The end of the paragraph you quoted.
