
Figure 8 pools RNP. Be wary of tides if you go, gets rough.
It is also potentially disappointingly smaller than it may appear.
Its a longer walk than most people imagine (you can't just park nearby) which is a shame because the entire track is well worth doing.

Out of the car, walk, photograph, back to the car.
I went there and it was a bunch of Instagram models hogging some very seaweedy and unappealing ocean pools in the rock. Definitely not worth the trek imho. Royal national park has many better sights.
That’s a melted snowman
figure 8 pools , royal national park, people die there. dont go.
If it weren't for the fact this is in the Australia Reddit, I was ready to say this was The Burren in Ireland.
Bitch of a walk
Royal National park figure 8 pool. Noice spot
There are some amazing rock pools north east of Sorrento, haven't seen such perfectly round ones though.
One of the Kardashians must have fallen here 😂
I spent a week camping at a spot like this south of Kalbarri WA about 30 years ago. 

Low tide fishing was a lot of fun - so many options.
https://maps.app.goo.gl/SHCw3jg1aiMprVwx8 right here
Where your mum just sat
Just be smart about when you park and walk around. Lots of blind corners with cars approaching at speed
Good old figure 8 pools The Royal National Park nsw
I wonder how long until people start asking this question on AI pictures.
I almost recognised this from the photo. Almost...
Somewhere your mum sat down
It's in Australia.
Right near the beach, Boy-ee!
This is at the beach
On a rock shelf
Near the ocean
Maybe Uranus?
Sydney the shithole
Where is RNP?
Thanks 😊
how about our little blue ringed friends?
The cliffs on the walk/surrounding it is much more impressive. I was so disappointed when I saw the pool for the first time.
Thank you for saying potentially. I'm from Perth, and a lot of things are new and fascinating to me. Even the presence of life other than humans. Other than some really nice birds.
That's what she said
That's what she said.
They are pretty deep though.
nah, it's a good thing.  Keeps people away.
Yet I saw dudes carrying surf boards down the main track to the nearby breach which is a long walk with an unwieldy load like that. But yeah a fair trek in.
People watching at these pools was more interesting than the pools themselves. Plenty of much better sights in the NP.
>people die there. dont go.

This is akin to saying people die on the roads, don't drive. Or, people die from electrocution, don't use electricity 


Many people safely go there, and have lots of fun - exercise caution. Check tide and waves and you'll be fine
Same as hospitals. Can't die in hospital if you never go.
Is this place haunted? 😱
Booo, fun police! People die there being stupid, just don't be stupid, check tides and don't fuck around.
Sounds it. Don't think I'll bother
Royal National Park, about an hour south of Sydney, best entrance is Sutherland.
Just in case, I'll reiterate, make sure you're only going during low tide, and preferable wind conditions, waves there are no joke, people died there. https://amp.abc.net.au/article/10853854
ONLY go at low tide.
Don’t listen to these commentators, the best pics for your insta are at high tide, no risk no reward, you want to make it to 100k followers or not?!?!
you're welcome. 


The next lesson is pros going as a group of young adults to the local Westfield. we're going to start saying hello to other people, first off the bat is fine , he's probably free to fly back to bat planet or whatever those weirdos do when to overcome.

anyway it looks like those
They are like make-up? Play with them and they make your face turn blue.
They get washed up at high tide, fun for the whole family
It looks great on instagram and that’s all that counts, who cares about the real world??? Am I right?
You ever seen one of those really big hills you cant walk up in your thongs? Weird shit.
Unfortunately not quite hard enough to stop the insta douches 

When the pool has a slick from tanning oils, oh man it makes you sick
Lol, burning sand beach has been surfed way before the figure 8 pools became Instagram famous.
Why this place is dangerous?
im telling people not go to because i dont want to compete with the traffic and parking in that area.
yeah i never encourage people to go hospital either. people die there or give birth . both bad things.
if you believe that sort of thing then yes. it was traditionally a womens only area in Aboriginal culture , it was a place women used to give birth.   
  
so yeah if you believe in that sort of thing its taboo area for men in one culture,
For figure eight pools I’d say the Otford Lookout entrance is best.
I love it when this community prioritizes safety above all else
But if not pool, why pool shape?
💯 guy I used to work with took months off work after suffering a badly broken leg there. He had to get helicoptered out.
Even at low tide it’s dangerous
All the cool kids are on Tictok
High tides, people not understanding how rough the sea is. Low tide is the time to go and only low tide
Large waves can wash over the platform and bash people around or carry them out to sea

There was an incident where 100 people were injured when one particularly large wave hit.

https://www.smh.com.au/environment/figure-8-pools-instagram-craze-drives-risky-behaviour-in-royal-national-park-20160111-gm30cf.html

BUT - if you check tide and waves - it's safe

For comparison - the worst day in Bondi's history had something like 250 people swept out to sea after three large waves in succession. People still swim there safely, as long as they pay attention and exercise appropriate caution

*After some 30 long agonising minutes the water was cleared. It was time to count the cost. Approximately 250 bathers required assistance; 150 were rescued unharmed; 60 were suffering from immersion; 35 were rescued unconscious and revived; and five people were dead.*

https://bondisurfclub.com/the-club/history/black-sunday/
Its a tidal rock pool and as such is affected by tides and ocean swell. Ocean wave height may be more than double reported average wave heights.
Wow. Thanks for letting me know. Yeah I love this kind of stuff.
Man, they are threatening to close the pools altogether because of tourists that fuck around.
Thanks mate. 🤘🏻
Terrible! Can’t they put an even bigger sign right in their faces?
The Sydney basin has rock shelves.

Close all the coast ?
The nanny state says yes
