
Why they dressed her like a cricketer
The channel 9 commentators were lost for words when it was on free to air.
I mean I couldn’t do that, but also I don’t want to
Finally, an Olympic performance where i genuinely believe i could do it!
I'm speechless. I am without speech.
is anyone connected with the Australian breaking community here?   Like how the fuck is this the best bgirl in Australia. I don't even blame her, I blame whoever selected her.
IOC seriously contemplating banning us after this shenanigans
Say some gansta is dissing your fly girl, just give em one of these.
Me at recess in 2001 telling people I can breakdance.
Kath and Kim vibes.
When it was revealed she was a Uni professor who has studied the ‘theory of dance’ so much of this immediately made sense
It gets worse on every re-watch!  Beyond awful!
Looks like she’s been sprayed with a bit of the old Mortein
“I met a strange lady…..”
It looks like when a dog gets an itchy ear and rubs their head into the carpet
me when i lie on my resume and then have to do the things i said i could do
Perhaps everyone else will fall over just before the finish line?
Magikarp! I choose you!
You’d find 50 better breakdancers at every school with a decent concentration of Islander kids
So was this the best we had or did she just know the right people?
NZ here. Just popped in to see if you’re all ok. A friendly reminder we’ll remember your amazing haul of medals this Olympics, not this pork chop flailing about on the floor.

Kidding, it’s now the pork chop.
Can we PLEASE dump ASICS as our uniform sponsor? The Australian competition uniforms have been TERRIBLE this Olympics.
This is absolutely iconic. If there’s two things we value as a country they are winning at sport and taking the piss - we’ve already done plenty of the first, it makes me so happy we got to do the second as well
Anne Edmonds? Is that you?
It's giving Russell Coight x Kath Day-Knight
She did look like she broke the dance.
✅box ticked
There's buskers better than this on every corner. 

What the fuck
I dance like this after a bottle of red.
https://researchers.mq.edu.au/en/publications/the-australian-breaking-scene-and-the-olympic-games-the-possibili 

>We argue that breaking’s institutionalization via the Olympics will place breaking more firmly within this sporting nation’s hegemonic settler-colonial structures that rely upon racialized and gendered hierarchies.
I think Raygun is going to be the Eric "The Eel" Moussambani of the Paris Olympics.
That's the whitest thing I've ever seen and I've been to Antarctica
When cats sunbathe
Somebody come get their mum!
The uniform makes it look even worse . This is just embarrassing
How did this happen? If they'd just chosen a heroin addict from Newtown we could've gotten gold
I hope they sent chris lily AKA jonah for the bboys
Where’s the guy that removes audio & puts squeaky shoe sound on videos.
Gotta put that interpretive dancing degree to use! I like how she mixed dying possum road kill with a dash of seizure
She is amazing and this will be a legendary performance for generations.
As a Kiwi, well done Australia. That's a better burn than any shit talk we could ever come up with 👏
“Cause you were amazing, we did amazing things”
Just to add to all the comments asking 'is she the best we have??', 'why couldn't we send someone else???' etc. no, she's not the best or even top 1000 in Australia.


Why didn't we send someone else? Ask her. She's on the committee or whatever.


I've been a b-boy for 18 years and am still active to this day. I'm 32 now.


Why didn't we have better representation? 


A lot of b-boys and b-girls consider this a lifestyle and not a sport. Yes a lot of us enter competitions and travel around the world to battle, but we do it for the love of the culture and it's just our way of life. Others see this as an opportunity and are cultural appropriators at the highest level.


This was an opportunist showcase and a national embarrassment. I'm glad the event won't be at the next Olympics and we can simply do our events for the fun and not for national praise and glory.


That's all from me.


B-boy,
Mighty Zulu Kings
It’s got that Jonah from Tonga feel to it
I’m second hand embarrassed for her. And to perform in that uniform. It’s like a cricketer having an epileptic fit on the field.
Surly just takin the piss out of something that never should have been included as an Olympic sport 🤣🤣 Deserves gold!
I'd usually say I don't want to judge until I've seen the other person's performance as well, but this time it would be unfair to say that. This is just objectively shit, or maybe I don't "understand" break dancing.
I remember the breakdancing of the 80s and 90s, what the hell is that performance? Did something terrible happen in the world of breakdancing between the 90s and now to make this acceptable on a world stage?
It's times like this where I wish Roy and HG still commentated the olympics.
Me navigating my bed in the morning, when my pelvic pain and sciatica work simultaneously work against me.
Theory will only take you so far
This was Aussie gold even without a medal. Priceless, couldn’t take my eyes off this performance, particularly the kangaroo hop and the sprinkler.
She looks like something from Boston dynamics that has fallen over
FYI people asking how deep the scene is in Australia. Generally Red Bull BC event has a national competition (with preliminary events in certain cities) as part of the global Red Bull BC tournament.  

Australian final for event in 2022:
https://youtu.be/52oUogbvL9I

Gold medallist Ami is another level and has won heaps of breakdancing titles:
https://youtube.com/shorts/X59fLzisrDw
She stole my routine that I did one morning under a kitchen table on ketamine.
Everytime I see this, I just assume some member from the Australian female cricket team jumped onto the stage for a shits and giggles
Since the succulent chinese meal guy passed away recently, we need another meme about something cringey and unfathomable to replace it.  This could be it.
I have a particular hatred for this with two reasons that may not be initially obvious:

One: This person said they were going to compete by being "artistic". To me, Art is the signature a person brings to an action. The execution of an action requires craft. Competition is about showing your mastery of a craft; sequencing moves, including innovations and interpretations. Your "Art" will be in the application of your craft. There was a lot of art in that performance, with little to no craft.

Two: this person has a PhD in breakdancing and dance culture. They would know intimately what good breakdancing is, what kind of movement would be respected, and applauded. Knowing this, and presenting its antithesis on a world stage, is a cynical, academically driven insult to breakdancing and the culture that inspired it. 

Shameful, self-centred, and embarrassing.
The only win here is that the floor got a good clean.
This has gone from so bad it's good for me. To do that on the international stage takes a lot of guts. 

https://researchers.mq.edu.au/en/persons/rachael-gunn
I’m not sure whether to feel more shame for our higher education system or sports team.
That's not Hip Hop, [this is Hip Hop](https://youtu.be/IS2KQ46Kf84?si=14Ri9EhjHuJE0oN6)

Dena must have been the Australian coach?
Breaking Bad.
All I can think of is this

https://youtu.be/FdCy6MGOVfw?si=tFWVwP43MaQoYwtw
I was in a big comment thread a week ago about what sport is the best one to try to go from rank amateur to Olympics, and there was lots of talk about shooting, kayaking and archery, but turns out the answer was breakdancing all along.
Good to see that Elaine found something to do after Seinfeld.
This entire event had me cringing the whole time, let alone when Australia started
We need to see what dance the other competitors done
kinda feels like a mockery
Aussie break dancing - it’s just a chill wiggle around on the floor. Maybe with lay down rest between funky worm like manoeuvres.

Rest of world- it a super athletic gymnastic martial art of dance.
What in the fresh hell is going on here
Someone forgot to have their Vegemite this morning.
I mean, what I found remarkable is her confidence. She must have seen other dancers during trainings, she must have watched videos and she must have had a oh! fuck moment. Still, here she goes, doing flippy flappy with confidence. A true blue Australian.
Finally, Australia has a national dance to rival the Haka. The next match against the All Blacks is gonna go off!
Is this an actual Olympic event?

I call bullshit
Fentanyl is no joke people
This is a joke right? There's no chance this is a competitive break dancer.
To those saying we had noone better. We do, in fact goto any street corner and you'll find someone. Go watch her youtube videos on previous breakdances, she's just as objectively bad there and somehow won, corruption all the way through.
It it’s beyond ridiculous that you could just Google breakdancing competition 2023 and see the gymnastic and acrobatic moves they do, and then have someone turn up and give some camp rock style dance is laughable

Unbelievable arrogance to turn up and think that just because it’s dance and an art, that you could get away with not being able to do anything that supports your own body weight

Australia would have scored more having one of the gymnasts turn up for 10 minutes

The cognitive dissonance to have learned and studied breakdancing and to see and know what people can do, to then think you’re deserving of a place on that stage blows my mind. 18-0 , 18-0, 18-0 loss just highlights how this is by far the worst athlete at the games

I’d genuinely have scored more with zero experience but a single years training
Brilliant. Me and the 2 year old nephew will give this a crack sometime today.
Did...did we win?
This is democracy manifest
Intellectual wank in the arts is not unknown in Australia. Sub culture becomes institutionalised. Making a statement about one institutionalisation of an art (Olympics) from an institutionalised perspective (academic arts) is kinda cringe. Or perhaps main character syndrome in that it's exclusionary to the essence, origin and authenticness of that art form. 

That there is a lot of big words that I'm not sure I spelled right. What I mean is, we opted for wanky wank instead of supporting the kids, good kids that deserve a go and not have their diverse and evolving identities mushed into an alienating formal structure.
strong fatboy slim 'praise you' vid feels.
Does anyone know her story?

Is she literally the best we had or did she steals some poor young girls spot at the Olympics
https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-features/australian-olympic-breaker-raygun-1235077337/

> Australian Olympic Breaker ‘Raygun’ Loses Dance Battles, Wins Our Hearts

That's a devastatingly patronising headline. That's what they write about the olympic swimmer from equatorial guinea.
and this isn’t even the one with the kangaroo jumping!
Got that cricket one day outfit going tho
Me trying to get out of a beanbag.
Spinning like Homer Simpson rolling around on the floor
I’m calling bullshit. She’s angling for tv or to get a show. So they’re telling us, she’s the best we had to offer? Bullshit 🤔
Looks like a new zealander to me.
It just reminded me the last time I stubbed my toe at 3am wanting to take a piss I make the same bodily movements.
Maybe I'm getting old but the Olympics are meant to be going above and beyond the mental and physical limits of day a world championship, lifting and excelling as much as possible. 

I saw some of this competition this morning and it looks like they pulled people from their retail jobs the morning of tryouts.
I'm still trying to figure out if there were actually trials to determine our best prospects. This feels like a position that was gifted. If she was the best, damn I'd love to see the others. I knew it was going to be bad when I saw the Aussie tracksuit. Where was the streetwear? She gave me John Howard vibes
Looks like she got epilepsy and needs medical attention
I studied break dancing for a few years waaaay back in the 80s so I’m no expert, but what the actual fuck is this total cluster fuck of shit covered vomit???
Olympic competition has really degraded
Honestly embarassing
This unaired episode of Kath and Kim goes hard.
Drunken wedding reception dancing is an Olympic sport?

Guys, I've found my calling.
Wow! What a fantastic reenactment of the Beetrooter trying to get up off a Canberra footpath...
Only a few days ago we had a 14 year old on top of the world looking cool as fuck and making us look awesome plus all the other athletes showing the world what Aussie spirit is and today we wake up to a 36 year old interpretive dancer pretending to know what breakdancing is sending us all the way back to the end of the line with whatever the hell that is
Is that Celeste Barber?
But she has a "degree" in break-dancing guys! And also direct connections to the Australian selection committee, which is just a coincidence I assure you!
I come from the land down under, but that was hard to watch. 🤦
She won the participation award.
If you watch it dubbed to the Seinfeld theme, it makes it better 😏

https://x.com/SharpFootball/status/1822079866507845757
It looks like a new character of Chris Lilley
My bladder cannot take this! I haven’t laughed this much in ages.
Reminds me of the time in primary school where I somehow got assigned to do a "techno dance" because I liked techno, I didn't know what that meant so I just made some shit up and nearly ended up having a panic attack. I still cringe about it every time I'm reminded 20 odd years later so thanks a lot
Similar to how "doing a Bradbury" now denotes being the last person standing in a competition - the term "doing a Raygun" is now trending on social media to describe bullshitting one's way into being promoted well above one's level of competency, only to then completely embarrass oneself when ones utter lack of skills & knowledge become very apparent.
We should give back a gold medal for this display.
On behalf of Australia.

I am truly sorry.

I’ve seen some amazing people do amazing things. I hope those out there that actually have the truly godly skills gets to shoot their shot one day.
Proof absolutely anyone can be an Olympian!
I love how they added breakdancing as a sport to "gain interest from young people" when breakdancing hasn't been popular since the 80s/early 90s.

Really shows how old the people voting on these things are.
I just Hope she found her contact lens on that floor, she seemed to be in a pickle trying to locate it 😂
Jesus - what the hell was that - I could do better than that nonsense
This is like the worst thing I have ever seen. How the fuck is this in the olympics?
Roy and HG just did a good commentary on this. Re the judges do not understand the flailing kangaroo moves.
I already can’t do secondhand embarrassment so this is downright fucking lethal to me
Why the fuck was she wearing a tracksuit from Kath & Kim? It was so cringe.
It's like a roomba took human form and decided to represent Australia in breakdancing at the Olympics
God Damn I love Australians.
they could have picked any random performers on pitt street on any random day and they could have done a better jobs.
The more I watch it the more I'm convinced shes taking the piss on purpose out of anyone 'breaking'
I truly want to know how she qualified.
Is this a Kath and Kim episode?
She probably would have won if it wasn't for the seizures
Is she having a seizure? Why is no one helping her?
Never thought I’d see academic wank manifest at the olympics. Lady thinks  getting a PHD in break dancing means she can compete internationally - totally delusional. This is what happens when people appropriate street sub-culture with no shame.  
Can we revoke her citizenship?
I was thinking it was a spare lawn bowls uniform
Chris Lilley has really out done himself with his new character
When I had only seen her I thought all competitor had to wear clothes like this. But it’s just her! Makes it so much more hilarious. 

Totally dressing as Raygun for Halloween.
My dog does this in the dirt after I bathe him... never knew he was a break dancer...
Subway employee*
PE teacher
Lmao was thinking that too
Lmao I wasn't gonna show my husband this post because he can't handle second-hand embarrassment but, my God, this comment deserves to be shared with my loved ones
Thank fuck she didn't start flossing
Cricket is in the next olympics lol
Every time I watch it gets better and better. The crowds faces. The judges faces.

Edit: Sorry just realised the judges faces were from the shot in this article:

Here’s everything you need to know about your new favourite Olympic sport, breaking
 https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-08-09/paris-olympic-games-breaking-start-what-is-need-to-know/104205078
The American commentators mentioned she dressed like she worked at Brisbane zoo.
I need a recording
I saw it where some American was doing the commentary. After a long silence she went “well she looked like she enjoyed the music” 😂
They were 😂😂😂 Complete silence!! I saw this live
We need aussieman or Roy n Hg for this fuck up
Trying to get back up after 30 schooners and falling off the barstool
Surely she was a few chardies in.
Eternal internet fame and all expenses paid trip to Paris!

All it’ll cost is a little bit for dignity
I thought this was Andy Lee doing the average person comparison segment before the real competition got underway
This is going for Internet gold and you know it, Reddit.
Complete respect for her getting up there and doing that, can't knock her confidence
I’ve seen toddlers with better performances
I am so sad I missed the opportunity to be selected. With a few wines under my belt, I would given Raygun a run for her money.
You cry. Then when you see the dancing, you cry again.
Fuck it's a hard watch. The cringe is real.
As an Aussie, I find this hard to watch
She's definitely giving off sweet fancy Moses vibes
/r/UnexpectedSeinfeld
You have a slack jaw and not much to say.
This is the secret break dance footage from Kath and Kim.
Yes, I want to hear their justification for selecting her. 

She's probably the worst breaker I have ever seen and I have sat through many primary school dance concerts.
Honestly, I think this is one of those times where she was one of very few to even try out.
Someone else on another thread made a very good point; 

Do you really think the Australian breaker community are at all interested in competing at the Olympics? 

IMO This girl studied the culture and upon realising the above, took advantage of that fact.
They could easily have selected 
[Jonah Takalua](https://youtu.be/R3GOV0RbkoQ?feature=shared)
Her insta has videos of her in other tournies and it's way better than this. It's nothing close to the level of the other dancers at the Olympics, but she at least knows what she's doing and isn't flopping like a seal or doing a dinosaur dance. She's got to be taking the piss here. Maybe knows she doesn't stand a chance, so having a bit of fun with it.
>is anyone connected with the Australian breaking community here? Like how the fuck is this the best bgirl in Australia. I don't even blame her, I blame whoever selected her.

I think you are looking at the entirety of the Australian breakdancing community in this video.

It is a joke of a sport that should not be in the Olympics, and a whole nation just trolled the IOC.
Because he story of the old hipster uni lecturer mum giving it a go was far better for the "story" of Olympic athlete  for the media than sending the actual best athlete to compete on quite literally, the world's stage.

The poor athlete, Molly, that absolutely destroyed Raygun in the qualifiers had her opportunity stolen from her and if you do not believe me have a look for yourselves - [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MorhA98eK7M](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MorhA98eK7M)

# JusticeForMolly
From her paper:

>As the world’s biggest island, at 7.692 million km², the landscape of Australian breaking is marked by distinct, self-determined, localized scenes that are isolated

>Lacking the infrastructure of a city-to-city rail network,  Australian breakers fly or undertake lengthy drives to visit other Australian  breaking scenes. And so, these scenes are held together by their shared  connections and relationships to the practice of breaking, which is itself quite  loosely defined.

> Mamoose points out that poorly attended events impact the ability not only to attract sponsors but to also build the next generation of breakers. 

So I think she being the best bgirl in Australia, is proving her thesis correct.
She has a phd in break dancing.
We all know there’s some connection here to people high up, there’s no way any Australian athlete who even failed to qualify for the Olympics for any sport could be touched by her embarrassingly non-existent athleticism.
I can help answer, as a long time breaker myself and a part of the Australian breaking scene. The breaking is judged in a fairly complicated way. 

It’s not just about acrobatic tricks, it’s a dance - and so original moves and flow of movement is also judged favourably. Raygun has a lot of original moves, she also improvises well and dances to the music well. She’s also good at executing her moves. This is how she qualified in the Oceania qualification competition. If you look up the judging criteria for the Olympics there are categories like vocabulary, musicality, originality - all categories that are not about doing big flashy gymnastic-style movements.
Or who her parents are / how much money changed hands.
We have to give back a gold after that.
Feels like we've just committed a War Crime with this one folks.
Our banter went too far this time.
That’s the 411!!
In the gang world, we use something called fluffy fingers.
The breaking of the dance is a lot like a good marriage.
Funny, I was thinking the same thing, but it was in the 1980s... Fuck I'm old! 

Props to you!
[Margaret Bland](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aElG1Mqncp0)
Omg my daughter said this. Mum I can totally see Kath putting on a snazzy outfit and learning this routine
Chris Lilly
Literal PhD in breaking
She's like someone from a teen dancing movie. 
I feel like if she really was a professor of dance theory, she would've known that she was not capable of putting the theory into action and would've selected someone else...
Haha winner
The definition of Looked good on paper
Literally sounds like a Chris Lilley sketch.
I had to turn it off and I might need to leave the country
I think the art form is lost on me.

It probably took great effort, fitness, and skill to do a classier version of me after looking at flashing lights.
Hey she’s got a got a PHD in breakdancing, people just don’t understand the cultural significance of that performance and was robbed of the win /s
I'm the opposite. I love her and her performance even more with every watch. It's like watching Kath and Kim, the first watch you're sitting there aghast. But by the 5th rewatch you love their antics so much you're quoting them. 


Raygun is an Australian icon and needs to be protected.
More smart more safe....
She made me nervous...
I was waiting for the butt drag across the floor
Sure I know how to use photoshop
Honestly if they randomly brought Bradbury he'd probably do a better job just on the fly
But nothing happened!
2028 Olympics, she just straight up levitates for a minute shooting draconic fury from her eyes
That made me piss myself
She’s certainly not the demographic I was expecting representing Australia in breakdancing 😂
She formed the breakdancing federation when it was announced breakdancing would be in the Olympics
Yes
Usually us Aussies claims Kiwis as our own, any chance you guys want to claim Raygun?
We're not ok, but thanks 👍
Nice to know our neighbours always have our backs.
Ahem, one could draw a comparison to this with the NZers attempt at the C2 men’s event…
No we're not ok. Can you send us a carton of L&P and a bag of Feijoa please, we need to be alone right now.
Did... did they learn to breakdance from Bluey?
We just crowned a new queen why would we not be alright?
To be fair is it her fault or is it whoever judged her worthy of Olympics
It's all good. Most of us are remembering to take our meds.
No probs. You laid down a fine challenge in the canoe race. How could we not respond triumphant. And glad to have helped with 70 year old competition to help you rig the Olympic qualifying!
She looks like a Cricketer who took a wrong turn and ended up on the breakdance stage.
They’re SO ugly, and when compared to other countries that have cool designers we look pretty ordinary.
You just *know* ASICS will leverage the athletes best ever performance at an Olympic Games, as a result of their sports wear.
Will she be back for LA in 2028? So we can get Breakin' 2?
This is going to be one of the legendary Australian meme moments for years to come.
The rest of the world needs to know this can be the outcome of being attacked by a drop bear.
Helen Bidou is back!


Simon! Simoooon! 
If we can enter Russell Coight into the dressage or heptathlon next Olympics, I think we officially win the Olympics forever having taken all the piss
Ok this got an actual snort out of me.
You'd get a better performance from an enthusiastic 11 year old.
maybe Dr Gunn was thinking of her academic career. She can now spend years publishing articles about the viral reaction to her performance and what it says about Australia’s culture.
Fuck, if this routine was Australia's best equivalent of the Carlos and Smith raised Black power fists since Cathy Freeman ran with the Aboriginal Flag, that's pretty fucking wild.
That's far too many zeds for my liking.
Yeah I think this is it. I reckon she's actively undermining the event to prove her point. She's way better than what she showed based on past performances, I think she might be an absolute legend but not for the reasons people in here might be thinking. Protest breaks people, she's for the culture.
>Thus many breakers are concerned that WDSF, and  the Olympics more broadly, will decontextualize breaking from its African  American and Puerto Rican cultural roots and histories

>Australian breakers criticized the  newly established conditions for Olympic breaking judges. The current WDSF rules stipulate that breaking judges cannot be actively competing or teaching
Eric got away with it because of the meme value of actually winning his heat, and there was the plucky underdog story of him coming from an impoverished African country with a population of 1.5 million. This is much more an Elizabeth Swaney situation lol
I think Raygun needs to be defined as a Reverse Bradbury. 

> **Bradbury**
> An improbable victory attained by default; achievement only made possible by the stupidity/clumsiness/misfortune of others.

> **Reverse Bradbury aka Raygun**
> An expected loss because you used your influence to reach a level beyond your skill
Nah, it's more an "Eddie the Eagle". Dud last.
Tucked in green and gold tracksuit 🤌
This is the “we have Jonah at home” breakdance
Looks more like they sent Pat Mullins.
Holy shit I'd watch that, Chris dressed as Jonah doing break at the olympics would be iconic
Definitely folklore material!
Ya, this is going down in history. I love it for how bad it is.
Its definitely A performance for the generation
She might not have won gold but she’s won the internet today.
Eric the eel level shit
Nightclubs will never be the same for decades
Is this a Reverse Bradbury?
Did this happen at the same time that the succulent chinese meal guy died?
Nominate her to perform at the Brisbane 2032 opening ceremony.
You’re most welcome
Really it should not be an issue to include it in the Olympics... rather the issue is that this girl was sent as the contestant. It just seems like she is trolling us all with a satirical performance. Aka Chris Lilley style. I find it impossible to even believe that she is serious??
Because how could a dancer have such little insight?
Jonah is heaps better!
Think of the uniform as an homage to John Howard's tracksuit and iconic bowling arm, and it makes sense
What do you mean? This is exactly the performance I would expect from a middle aged uni professor.   😉
Right? I was just sitting here wondering if I was remembering it wrong. In my memories it was musical and fun to watch!
https://www.abc.net.au/listen/programs/bludging-on-the-blindside for those who aren't aware 😊
We should've sent Molly
I wouldn’t have called the succulent meal guy cringey. He was hilarious and entertaining. This made me hide my face in embarrassment because that’s Australia she’s representing and I don’t want to be associated with that.
Exactly what I thought. It's like when a slayer dies it activates another so when succulent chinese guy died the universe threw us the Aussie bgirl we all didn't know we needed
Dead people can be meme
I'm still waiting for her to say that she was trolling us all 🤣.

Sadly it appears that having a university education does not equate to having a eye or understanding of talent or execution of it. It's like some hairdressers who have been hairdressing for 40 years but instead of becoming top of their game they have just excelled at delivering tasteless 💩.
I don't even know how one gets a phD in something obviously so visual. Was her dissertation a thousand pages of screenshots of electric boogaloo?
I feel kinda bad for her but can't stop laughing at the same time.  She seems sweet, knew she had no chance at really competing, so went out and had fun.  

Is it her fault we had nobody better to represent?  No, she did win the Oceania Breaking Championships so it is what it is.
Archery? FFS! Just try being in the top 4 in your local club, let alone the nation. Classic Dunning-Kruger ignorance.
Turns out this isnt even the breakdancing competition
The other competitors are actually really good.
It has the vibe of "drunkest Aunty at the wedding".
They also have line dancing, morris dancing and the 10K moon walk.
Yes, for the first, and probably last time I reckon.
Only the ridicule of the world
https://youtu.be/--hnj1cNLL4?si=m-sufzBHshuhI083

I sure hope it's building up to some sort of elaborate The Chaser type prank
Next Olympics she could be on our canoe team. 
You can laugh but when she left that dance floor it was completely dust free.
You win. I thought it was the Cricket Pajamas but the dark green especially.

That's ye olde lawn bowl folks.
I thought it was a law bowler and this was her ironic victory celebration.
Haha yeah I said the same thing to someone else, looked liked someone had laid down a good one in the lawn bowls and was celebrating!
Hahahah yes! It’s giving Pat the one that did the rolling!
People keep posting this, but this sort of thing really is his bread and butter
Hahaaha good idea. Defs throwing a halloween party to do this and greeting my mates with a "dance".
hahaha solid comment.
My terrier does this after a dump, we call it the Pooh dance he is proper happy with himself 😂
She's a sandwich artist! She didn't go to a weekend seminar at Greendale Community College to be called an employee.

Eat Fresh
The pants aren't pulled up to their full potential.
I was in Germany recently and discovered they have a word for this  It’s called Fremdschämen. 

My new favourite German word to replace schadenfreude.
American here. We are just happy we don’t have to change or adjust any of our Australian stereotypes after watching this. Makes life more straight forward.
Brisbane has a zoo?
Me too, get it for this guy for his cake day and let the crumbs trickle down into my gullet
“And this is Raygun representing her country…”

“Trying some moves there…”

“Very uhhh… creative…”

“She mentioned that it’s only been in the last year where she didn’t feel awkward breaking…”
I saw it live as well and I was also too stunned to speak. Can now see why it won’t be at LA in 2028 😂
Was gonna say, looks like the average person in the valley on a Friday night, minus the cricket uniform.
Tbf, if this made it to the Olympics, I reckon Hamish and Andy could legitimately battle it out to see which of them makes it to 2028
I've always advocated for the Olympics to include one regular person, so we can appreciate how difficult the events really are.
I'd like to thank, in this order, ibuprofen, aerobics oz style and my family for believing in me
We must knock this sort of unhinged “confidence”.
If you speed it up, it actually makes you laugh too
It's like a whole body dry heave set to music
Unbelievable cringe.
I heard she has a Phd. in breakdancing. Not joking.
I was watching it this morning and had to turn it off. The second hand embarrassment was overwhelming.
As an Aussie, I find this hilarious. It's like a Chris Lilley sketch made flesh (back when he was good)
My wife and I had so many questions... I thought our Aussie representative at breakdancing was almost a shitstir...a satirical joke... like a Kath and Kim version of real breakdancing. It was so cringe.. some of her 'dance moves' looked like me stretching my neck after a 12hr shift... the outfit was so out of place.. no style, no flow, no vibe...
I have watched it 5 times on 5 different platforms and haven’t made it through to the end. Literally the worst second-hand embarrassment I’ve ever felt.
Same, I found it really hard to watch… but then watched it 3 more times, realising it was gold all the way.
I thought it was a parody comic relief during the break until I realised it was an actual competitor during an actual competition.
As somebody watching I find it hard to be Australian
I find it hard to watch as a human.
Aussie Man reviews will be gold. Spinny Spinny, head spin, flick kick. Fuck yeah
Like a dry heave set to music.
She found out what the minimum requirements were, went to the events necessary. Likely no one else did. To get into the Olympics you do not have to be the best, you just have to meet the requirements, which are generally entering and placing in several competitions, when those competitions do not have many competitors it improves your chances. 

There was a similar situation in the winter sports where they had to place at least 12th in a range of competitions so a woman entered competitions with 12 or less people in it, met the minimum requirements and went to the Olympics, while other athletes only entered the larger competitions and therefore reduced their chances.

Had better dancers had the opportunity or bothered to try then they would have been the ones at the Olympics.
This does have memories of the cringy singer/dancers that would also be rapping about staying in school and don’t do drugs.
Hahaha, yes! My son’s school has this annual dance concert, Year 3 kids dancing to Ice Ice Baby last December had better rhythm and beat than this.
Any serious breakdancer wouldn’t be able to compete in the Olympics 

They’d all test positive to recreational drugs.
Did you watch the others? They were good. Theres a reason her scorecard read 0-54 after 3 rounds.


Nicka, Ami, 671 killed it
https://www.instagram.com/bgirl_nicka/?hl=en
> IMO This girl studied the culture and upon realising the above, took advantage of that fact.

... she's been in the Australian breakdancing scene since the mid-2010s.

> Do you really think the serious breaker community are at all interested in competing at the Olympics?

I do. Did you see the [medallists who won the breakdancing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xU2gN9zI5bQ)? They're not all incompetent like Raygun.
I saw she's a lecturer in dance and culture who basically put herself in the running because she was that person who thought hey I reckon I could go to the Olympics, it's a new sport and there won't be much competition.

Considering how much of her performance was memes including the outfit I reckon she's in on the joke.
Apart from Raygun , the rest of the bgirls are legit top break dancers.
There’s actually a lot of talented competitors who’ve been around. Hong 10, Shigekix, Menno, Ayumi, Logistx. 

If you Google some of them, you’d be pretty amazed.

It’s just kind of sad that she ruined the first impressions.
Skateboarders say the same thing. To me it comes off as sour grapes gatekeeping.

"REAL skaters are keeping it real. They don't need the olympics"

It's typical fringe groups trying to define who gets to be part of the fringe group so they can still try and feel special and be outsiders.
It is factually incorrect.

The most important event in the breaking community is the Red Bull BC One competition. The current champion is Hong 10, and previous winners include Victor, Amir, and Menno. All of them will be participating in today's b-boy battle.

Additionally, in yesterday's b-girls competition, Logistx, the 2021 Red Bull BC One winner, the 2022 winner India, and the current champion Ami all participated, with Ami taking the win. The current European and world champion, b-girl Nicka, won silver.

So, the 'serious breaking community' is indeed participating, as all the current best in the world are in this cypher.
Yeah I understand that, but WHY would Australia send someone then?  As funny as it is, there's tax payer money going toward that bunny hop!
>Do you really think the serious breaker community are at all interested in competing at the Olympics?

Isn't that what people thought about skateboarding, bmx tricks and surfing?
Puk you Miss
I was going to say this looks like a scene from a Chris Lilley show ☠️
nah, I've seen some of the Aus breakdancing community in action and they are serious and seriously good. Maybe they just aren't into the idea of doing it this way.

There's more going on here, I'll wait to see what she says but video of her past performances were waaaay better than this. Not competitive with the best here, but better than this. Protest breaks?
read what her PHD is about, the whole thing is an elaborate troll to point out the entire farce.
> It is a joke of a sport that should not be in the Olympics, and a whole nation just trolled the IOC.    
    
As opposed to what? Prancing around on ponies in dressage? Or rolling around on skateboards? Or waving ribbons in rhythmic gymnastics? Every Olympic new bull shit sports keep getting introduced to lock in new audience from the host country.
She has a PHD in the *politics* of breakdancing....
Saw she is from Hornsby in Sydney, looked up as a guess and confirmed she went to Barker College. I'd say you're onto something. 

Her thesis abstract is also bloated nonsense, lacking any mention of socio-economic background/race representation, strange for a social science thesis on breakdancing.
I mean, we cancelled the French submarine contract and they were not happy, but.... this is throwing hands. Literally.
We'll be without a flag next Olympics like the Ruskies.
Dinkin Flicka
Yep, backspins on the classroom wooden floor in the 80’s. those were the days.
Her professors should’ve torn up her thesis during her defence and declared a Dance off.
You know what they say, those that can, do. Those that can't, flop around on the floor and call it dancing.
Tbh it is pretty impressive if you watch people who are really good at it. Idk if it should be at the Olympics (but golf has significantly lowered the bar for me, I honestly would rather watch this than the golf)
I have a PhD in Rockology from Abide University, do I get to go to Eurovision?
Ironically her having a PHD in breakdancing makes this all make sense to me lol.
Haha, when I showed this to my partner, she immediately said Kath n Kim!!!
She took me in and tried to breakdance.
That's it. That's all that needs to be said.
According to people I know in the dance community, she is not. Many of the dance community are asking questions now
Strong "I AM THE ~~SENATE~~ BREAKDANCING FEDERATION" vibes
Have to respect the hussle of seeing an opportunity to be an Olympian and making it happen
If you can’t get any real street cred. Get a PHD and start you’re own federation where any talented girls from Western Sydney are conveniently overlooked.
Prestige Worldwide...
Nice try.

OMG she has a wiki:  “She is coached by her husband, Samuel Free,[5] and trains for three to four hours a day.[6]”

That’s a whole lot of fair dinkum flailing
We’re laughing with you and at you.
We do not speak of the C2 event.
She has a PhD in it apparently, so perhaps she learned it from descriptions in a text book.
She looks like a Subway employee.
Just popped by the breaking stage before her end at the lawn bowls
Fashion is not really Australia's strong suit, so the more we embarrass ourselves, maybe the more we'll take it seriously.
The entire sport isn't coming back in 4 years
They’ve dumped breakdancing altogether for the next Olympics. This probably didn’t help.
No chance. This is pure cope.

* She's an Australasian breakdancing champ. Her winning performance looked much like her Paris performance.
* Her instagram shows she's been glowing about what an honour this is for the past year, plus an extensive seemingly 100% authentic press tour about her passion for the sport.
* She's a vocal advocate for getting the sport more funding and attention, which humilating us deliberately on the world stage would undermine.
* If this is a bit, she committed way too hard for us to believe it's a bit. Like - 16 years of competitive breakdancing too hard.
* So far, her only response to the criticism is to suggest she's only being slagged for her uniform because she's a woman.
That's what I said in r/olympics and people didn't go for it. On the other hand, I genuinely cannot believe there wasn't a single more capable breakdancer that could've gone in her place.
Oh this is incredible. Doing this for any reason is top tier, great bit.
but people liked eddie the eagle.
I think Chris Lilley in blackface would be less offensive than what we witnessed last night
Yes. Instead of just trying to remain standing and it meaning she won, she intentionally flopped about and came last. Presumably.
The torch has been passed. All hail our new Monarch of Memery.
Nah I'm sorry, are you guys ok?
She thinks she is something she is not.
okay I agree but also 36 being called ‘middle aged’ just really hurt me
EXCUUUUUSE ME?! 36 is "middle aged" now?! I feel personally attacked
Took a lot of guts to commit to that performance and look like the second biggest dick at the 2024 Olympics 🤣
Succulent Chinese Meal guy produced the greatest arrest video in history and dropped a dozen meme lines in the span of 60 seconds.  

This is having the rest of the world point at Australia and laugh at us.
Don’t feel bad, she 100% knew what she was doing.
Was she the only competitor at the Oceania champs or was the competition even worse than her?!
How do you figure we had “nobody better to represent”? I’ve worked in the circles of WAAPA and Sydney Dance Company. There are many, many, many girls and women who could represent
I would watch the moonwalk, that would be hilarious 
The Australian Swiffer
Can I borrow her?  My floors are a mess.
Hahahaha
John Howard on his morning walks
AUSTRALIA’S FAST LAWN BOWLER! (Only a few over a certain age will understand this reference).
I've got a gumnut up me nose!
Bluey, Bandit, chilli and bingo are pretty good dancers though so now I don’t know what to think
Cities can pick "elective" sports. Paris is all for the arts. LA. chose Flag Football and Squash. Bleh- I'd rather watch middle aged educators doing the worm.
I'm not gonna pretend I know anything about breakdancing. I know it looks extremely fucking difficult. 

But is this genuinely the best we have?? I have seen buskers outside shopping centres pull off better flips and moves than this. I am so confused, how did she get the gig?
You forgot Voltaren and ice packs - for the rolled ankle...
i am a happy monkey..ty
It looks like when I’m trying sleep at night and can’t get comfortable.
I showed my wife, and she slapped the phone out of my hand and yelled NO.
I’m American and I also felt the second hand embarrassment.
Chris Lilley has done well at this games . First was Sneaky Nuts at the opening and now the bird that wanted to roll to Ularu.
The kangaroo jumping is 100% Kath Day Knight
Having had a horrific first trimester during my pregnancy, I swear she's copied these moves from me. 

Could have been an Olympian...
Not to mention all those comps get expensive, not everyone who can dance well also has the money to tick all the boxes.
She won the 2023 Oceania Breaking Championship, so amazingly she did actually beat people to get there.
Yep. There’s a similar problem at the moment in skateboarding because the talent in Australia is frankly unbelievable but the AIS only nominates 4 competitors per discipline for their funding scheme in four year cycles because it’s not considered one of the top tier Olympic sports. 

We’ve already lost Heili Servio to Finland because she couldn’t afford to attend the qualifying events without funding, and she’ll almost definitely be a gold medal contender in Los Angeles. We’ve lost a couple to America too and it’s only going to continue unless they expand it. 

I can’t even imagine what the scene is for breakdancing in terms of funding, but in sports with worldwide qualifying pools, if you can’t afford to drop everything and travel the world for 3 years you’re essentially no chance of being an Olympian.
Yeah, you basically just have to show up to events and not mess up. I watched a video on YouTube where an American skier who repped Hungary did that. She just turned up to all the qualifying events doing nothing and without falling and managed to nab a spot at the Winter Olympics lol.

Edit: Just realised you said the same thing reg the Winter games. I just woke up.
Yep, this absolutely tracks with what I would expect. Good on her for giving it a go I reckon.
So basically games the system to get a free trip to Paris?

Fucking legend.
I did a thing like this exactly with a co-Ed Olympic deal I got to go to Poland and shoot archery. You make all the requirements no one else does it and your in
Yup.

My husband is a fencer (epee & foil) and cannot get into the Olympics because of this stupid rule. He has fenced in Hungary with the Hungarian national team in England with English olympians, trained with good coaches in England and Hungary but cannot get funding and can't get into the Olympics because of this stupid rule.

Oh, and the Australian Fencing Committee is run by......SWIMMERS!
Reminds me of that African swimmer years ago that could barely swim. Bless his heart.
You know what's *really* fly? The bible, dude!
I get Chris Lilley vibes from this.
That was my exact thought "Oh god we sent one of those cringey 'Only mugs do drugs' dancers"
Our skaters can put down the billy for a couple of months, i'm sure our breakers can too.
Half of them would have visa issues for very minor offences, probably pot possession
To be fair. As an Australian I can say this with authority. She would probably still test positive to goon with those moves. Ive pulled off similar at weddings, parties, anything after a few fruity lexias.
Wasnt our hockey player looking for coke in Paris? Couldn’t be his first time
They were awesome! Thank you for sharing lol now the cringe feels even more real 🤣
Thanks for the link. These two were a billion times better than that floor crawl I watched in OPs post. Wtf.
She is a modern-day Eddie the Eagle, or Eric the Eel. As a Brit who bloody loves you lot, she was the highlight of the day for me. Her fish flop move, kangaroo hop, and swimming move were glorious. She was peak "I'm here for the vibes and memories", and is one of the people I will always think of when I remember the 2024 Olympics.

Like a lot of other people at these games, she didn't win a medal, but she won our hearts
If she managed to get an ARC Grant for it I shall be both impressed and annoyed that i didn’t think of it.
I really  hope it was a piss take on her part
Okay I just searched up Hong 10. This dude is amazing and what I have in my head of what breakdancing is... Do we seriously not have anyone even remotely close to this guy? I have seen people imitating breakdance at weddings that look like raygun lol.
That's a kangaroo hop my friend, and don't you fucking forget it!
Or did Gina fund it?
> Protest breaks?

This seems the most likely explanation - https://researchers.mq.edu.au/en/publications/the-australian-breaking-scene-and-the-olympic-games-the-possibili was linked elsewhere in the comments, she is one of the authors.
Can you elaborate please
*Golf*
I am a very **CONSERVATIVE** breakdancer
I read the abstract, and it definitely touches on social and racial issues surrounding the adoption of breaking by the Olympics. Not so much economic factors, though.
First you gotta have the vision.

Second you gotta have the Euros.
Nute Raygun
For once in my life I feel on the same level as an Olympic athlete.
In her interview she was like “i wanted to wear the green and gold”. Gotta respect the hustle
How do you train to do that for 4 hours a day?  Watch sprinklers?
cleanest floors in their neighborhood
Can't fault you, really.
Pack it up folks, we have officially broken the sport.
Stupidest most blasphemous “sport” to ever be considered for the Olympics in the first place and this is the piece de resistance. I’m so glad that is what this ridiculous idea of an Olympic qualified “sport” will be remembered as, and for that as much as I think she looked like a retarded subway employee impersonating a dog with an unscratchable itch; I thank you Aussies from the bottom of my heart for putting the perfect cherry on top of the reason why whoever petitioned this to be added and then voted “yes” for it should all be fired from the IOC. <chef’s kiss> 😂🤣
People saying it's a protest or she's taking the piss are huffing the biggest amounts of copium. You don't dedicate years of your life competing, start a federation and get a PhD and perform in front of the whole world as a protest. Seems to me that she's self proclaimed herself as an expert which has deluded herself to thinking she is a world class athlete. 
No one along the way has questioned or criticised her because of her "qualifications".
Also, if this were some kind of commentary on the potential of Olympics-style events to negatively stratify an activity that is heavily entwined with its own culture, it would be both sad and infuriatingly self-aggrandising for this to be the first course of action pursued.

Any self-respecting academic in the field of arts and social sciences knows that highly considered inclusion of those who comprise the subject of study is key in all research and policy outcomes. The opportunity could have been far better spent REINFORCING the local variants of breakdance the article mentions by showcasing it on a global stage.

Either way, if genuine then it’s a disappointing display of how one can abuse an emerging system through their stranglehold on its very structure, but if satire then the result is only a failed virtue signal that could have instead uplifted someone who would have derived actual heartfelt meaning from their performance while immortalising an example of the local craft through an international mainstream event and its myriad recordings.

Overall, regardless of the performance’s motive, the greatest and most crushing irony is that she has become a symptom of what her very own paper appears to caution.

On that sad note, I think I need a drink. I’m getting too depressed for the hypothetical performer who could have been displaying their craft instead
For sure, An A for Effort. But he didn't have Steven Bradbury luck the way Eric did.
I’ve met with the other Australians and we’ve come to the conclusion that we will just have to weather this storm out.
I'm 47 and I still refuse to accept that is middle aged
Behind the pole vaulter?
Hee hee 
I honestly expected to see an entourage of the Chasers follow her around after that.
Fuck that got me
She qualified as the Oceanic Champion and has represented Australia at the World Championships. 


These comps are run by World Dance Sport Federation-the same body that controls competitive ballroom dancing. 


My opinion is this is WDSF’s rebuttal to having ballroom dancing not trialled and approved as an Olympic sport.
She’s the most qualified individual as she has a PHD in breakdancing!
Pretty sure no one else signed up and if that’s the case more power to her!
I showed my partner and he said "that's basically how you look trying to get out of bed in the morning" 😫
LMFAO
Naurrrrrr
100% it's not like Australia doesn't love throwing funding at sports, but only particular sports.
I’d love to see the people she beat..
Oceania events are a notorious back door way that Australia gets people qualified. People think we're above that type of campaigning but we absolutely aren't.
At least the skateboarders we do send are good though lol
There’s already too much flag-shopping in the Lympics.
Basically, the dance community is very conservative in some ways and don't like big players coming in making competitions (Red Bull Dance Your Style, Olympics etc) and view it as "not a real dance competition". I don't agree with the views in our community, but that's often how it is.

With that said, Red Bull is extremely good towards Australian dancers. For example, they qualify at the state level (free to enter and watch) and get paid around $300 to compete if you're in the top 16 of your state, then if you make top 4 in your city, you go to the national finals, and the winner goes international somewhere. All costs are paid by Red Bull.

I think for the Olympics, it might be more self-funded, which is an issue for a lot of break dancers since most dancers in Australia simply don't earn enough to do that.
The Australian Suduko team did this - a bunch of mates who wanted to represent Australia at something, found out Australia didn't have a sudoku Federation so formed one and nominated themselves to go to the world champs. One of them had  no idea what Sudoku was until they were on the plane

https://www.amazon.com.au/Full-Contact-Sudoku-Realised-Australia/dp/0733326447?ref=d6k_applink_bb_dls&dplnkId=5d0d8db2-4e0e-419f-bcfa-4d7256dd723a
I was about to say where's Mr G when you need him
Have already seen the overlay of this effort on top of Mr G performing to his students, and it's everything you want it to be.
Didn't they reinstate a snowboarders medal a while back because it was declared pot wasn't performing enhancing? 

Actually, bring on the drug olympics... I'd watch the shit out of those events.
They let in a child rapist in beach volleyball..
> she's been in the Australian breakdancing scene since the mid-2010s.

She dances like she's had a week's worth of lessons.
I’m with you. She’s incredible. This is peak entertainment and no I’m not joking h
She's published an article about protesting the inclusion of breaking at the Olympics so she's certainly funded in some capacity because she's lecturing.
She did the sprinkler
But who gets to use the Olympics to air their pisstake 😆. More power to her
Thank you for posting this, I really appreciate that it was an epic piss take.
I’m the other author btw and no it wasn’t a piss take. We did an ethnographic study for this article (meaning we did lots of interviews) and we were quite critical of how the Olympics is changing breaking on lots of ways. We didn’t make an simple argument that it’s either ‘good’ or ‘bad’.
Does that make her the best ever, when she didn't medal but instead completed the sport's history, which as an academic in breakdance, she can publish articles about
If it helps, we couldn't even laugh, just had a national minute of silence to acknowledge your pain, I'm sorry bros 😔
just turned 50. definitely not prepared for middle age just yet.
Correct
Don't forget our (Kiwis) two man canoe race fail. 
😂
He compared you to an Olympian, what a compliment!
We need to start taking money away from breaking.
I got you [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kc1dlmWC76g](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kc1dlmWC76g) - semifinal.

  
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MorhA98eK7M](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MorhA98eK7M) - Final
Me, pulling out my best dad-dance moves.

I even dazzled with my signature sidestep-click move and she still beat me.
Feat: NZ C2 500
https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/in-depth/524388/the-kiwi-canoe-crew-so-bad-they-got-sympathetic-cheers-at-the-olympics

Pretty much exactly this.
The men’s triple jump finals had three ex-Cubans jumping for three different countries. It was wild to see all in one event.
Ross Rebagliati. He only had trace amounts and argued he just got it from all the second hand smoke in whistler. He has his own marijuana brand now called Ross' Gold that you can buy in the government weed store.
Did he have to personally identify himself as a sexual predator to all the other athletes living in the village 

Because heaps of them are under 18 and that would be akward
That's what my wife said. It was her one of dad's signature moves.
The second one. She will be one of only a handful of people qualified to ever talk about being an Olympian in break dancing. 

... I'm now starting to go down a conspiracy path here that I don't think I want to...
I don’t think there was much ever given
You’ve just single handily drove this YouTube video views from 10 > 400+
Much better there with just doing dance move instead of trying to incorporate 'Aussie' moves in the dance.

But seriously, you could nearly fit that entire Oceanic comp in any community hall in remote Australia and still have space left.  There are more people watching a random weekend footy match.

It didn't even have youtube views until being posted here.

No wonder the comp isn't strong for who we sent.  I've seen kids with better flow and moves mucking around in the playground (I'm a teacher).  I'm guessing the comps just aren't worth it for serious dancers.
She’s so much better in semi final.. so much better. How’s she so bad in Olympics ..
I don’t watch a lot of b-girls.  
  
But why does it look like they are dancing in slow motion?
This story is completely not the same! NZ wanted 4 people on their squad so they could compete in the 4 person kayak; only 2 qualified so they shoehorned the other two into a canoeing competition so they could get on the squad.

It was all super successful because they got to participate in the 4 person kayak, and even made the semis!
I work in sport, have done for over a decade. Hell, I've worked at events like this. If there's enough of a chance in it, Australia will host themselves and get in some patsies.

I didn't see those guys, that's just a bit embarrassing.
I think I read that he wasn’t allowed to stay at the village with the rest of the athletes.
It goes deeper than we could have ever expected...
We should charge a tax on anyone who breakdances. Even in the privacy of their own home, they should pay the government to do it.
It gets even worse, she has a qualification in this, is head of associations and a judge.

Coming from the sports i've been involved in...... being an official strikes you from competition as being a conflict of interest for various reasons.
Really? Nice.


...Hold My Beer...
None of that stood out particularly either.
I think a lot of dancers didn't even know this was a competition. Olympic participation has a reputation for being for rich people (you'd need independent funding to adequately train for the more obscure/less popular events) unless you're a prodigy who started very young and got sponsored. Being a "street art", I'd bet most of the excellent breakers just had no idea this would be a thing.
The Semi didn't, the final did have 45k I think.
Honestly, I'm just hoping she was hungover. I feel like her just hitting the piss in Paris on a paid for trip is about as Australian a hustle as there is, which would immediately make me forgive the kangaroo flailing on the floor routine
If you look at her research (linked earlier in this thread) you'll see that she's almost certainly just taking the piss to prove a point.
But apparently he passed the IOC morality code 🤷🏻‍♂️
And that’ll be why…. Although at 14+ they’re a bit old for him, the disgusting pos 🤮
cringe and embarrassing 😅
Wait, she was a judge in the competition she won? Uh-oh.
It did to me... Just not in the way she probably hoped for. Those were also particularly bad... Someone please do some street recruiting.
That's better, I watched the videos, but didn't check the views and just went off the comment about it going from 10 to 400.
Kangaroo flailing is the perfect imagery for this.
She's 36. I look at my feet the wrong way and I'm a flailing kangaroo. I'm two years younger than she is. 

But honestly, given she has a doctorate in it, my guess is she used it more as a study trip than a chance to compete.

Either way, I admire her moxie!
I genuinely think she is trolling us all. This has to be on purpose. There is some debate in the breaking community (apparently. I don't know this for certain  as I'm not anywhere near cool enough to part of said community) as to whether it should be in the Olympics. Maybe this is her play to keep it out?
