
>A patron at a charity event is facing jail time for chasing a group of armed neo-Nazis, dressed in all black and sporting red flashing body-worn cameras, who had descended on the Thornbury fundraiser.

>Benjamin Squire, 29, appeared in Melbourne Magistrates’ Court this week as the only person charged over the incident in which police allege a group threw metal chairs in a melee outside Cafe Gummo in August 2023.

Of course the only person charged was someone trying to get the nazis to leave.
Probably the exact reaction the nazis were looking for, why else would they be wearing bodycams if not to antagonise people and then record the reactions so they can cry victim.
Someone chasing away nazi's was charged?

Good people are arrested while bad people are protected. This means we are ruled by bad people, not good people.
All that talk from ASIO this week about neo-nazi wannabe terrorists, and then we see this. Fucking pathetic this charge was even laid. Bet the police wouldn't take any responsibility if these people didn't fight back and were injured.
Why don't I see the armed neo-Nazis being charged with anything?

Just given the fact that the only person being charged is someone who was against the neo-Nazis... I'm to take it that the police and the courts don't have any issue with armed Neo-Nazi's and their conduct?
"Magistrate Tara Hartnett said she had dealt with the charge of violent disorder only once before"


So the cops/prosecution went out of their way to scrounge up a charge that they could possibly make fit. 


I honestly can't see how his behaviour was in any way different to the people we've seen use milk crates, shopping trolleys or bollards to defend themselves and others from being attacked by strangers in public. In those cases, the defenders were lauded as heroes and rewarded for their courage.
Nazis storm a blakfella rights meeting and the blakfella gets arrested for standing up for himself. Pretty standard for this country if we are being honest.
>To prove the charge of violent disorder, the court heard the prosecution must prove six or more people, present together, threatened with a common goal or intention to cause injury or damage.


>Benjamin Squire, 29, appeared in Melbourne Magistrates’ Court this week as the only person charged over the incident



Fuck it's a good time to be a Nazi. Not even billionaires are this far above the law.
I don’t suppose there’s a crowdfund for Mr Squire’s legal expenses?
Should be Australian of the Year.
People in the area should probably check out a concept called jury nullification.
So where's the video footage? 😆
I think with some police it offends them more that someone would basically do their job for them more than ski masked individuals frightening people at a fundraiser. They hold a monopoly on violence and that's the thing they really put effort into policing.
Vicpol weren't going to arrest their mates.
The person being charged is an amazing human being standing up for those who don’t have power. Happy to contribute to a fundraiser for Ben if there is one.
So our legal system is protecting literal nazis now? Ffs
Good job Benji!
how do we help him, whens the next court date and where?
They used to give you medals if you killed nazi's.  
 Now just chasing them away after they wanted to fight gives you a prison sentence . crazy times
So the Neo Nazis-pussies were there to 'intimidate' felt intimidated!

Meatheads!
Said neo-nazis are all known to the feds and some are probably undercover. As usual until a serious crime occurs and THEN it was "known to police" and "mental illness" as usual.
good on them, fuck nazi's
Awkward when the police arrive on scene by taking their black masks off
WTF this is awful… how is this even possible?
Bloody paywall
[removed]
The White Rose Society has a few clear photos of the neo nazi rats. [Source - White Rose Society](https://thewhiterosesociety.writeas.com/national-socialist-network-fail-to-attack-anti-fascist-fundraiser-in-thornbury). The chicken shits were also armed with knives and are the main agitators. They are terrorists pure and simple, and unfortunately, due to our media and politicians soft-handedness on these terrorists, their actions have and will most likely continue to become more violent, such as the neo-nazi terrorist that wanted to kill a labor mp, and the neo-nazi scum that stabbed a person at the University of Sydney.
Chasing Nazis is a civic duty. Dude should be up for an award, not charged.
The neo nazis probably couldn’t be identified due to masks and were very likely known to the police. Spend any amount of time in a blue collar workforce and it’s very apparent where these ideas are coming from.
You're not allowed to rock the boat in Australia, and police protect their monopoly on force more than they protect people. 

Any reasonable jury should acquit or nullify any subsequent trial. Second world war is a clear lesson: violence against Nazis is ethical and effective.
They are the end product of being raised entirely by institutional thinking, institutions goina protec even their basement spawn.


Ironically a very maternal response given how that end of the ideology views that sort of thinking. 

Mark my words, you'll soon find them unironically worshiping Elesh Norn from MTG as their machine mother.
Well the cops can't arrest themselves.
Historically they have livestreamed terror attacks. Not joking.
Nazis protect people in power and enforce the status quo. It's why people like the liberal party and murdoch media types love them so much. Nazis attack minority groups such as women, environmentalists, LGBTIQ+ community members, refugees, etc. because these groups take away power from the extremely powerful abusers. The role of the police is pretty much the same. 

If you want to see a really good case of this, the UK riots are a really good example. The violent terrorist scum going wild in riots who are destroying property with fires and assaulting people and police are getting just over 2 years in prison [Source](https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cm23y7l01v8o). If you block the road to raise awareness of climate change, you get up to 5 years [Souce](https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/article/2024/aug/01/just-stop-oil-protesters-jailed-climbing-gantries-block-m25). We're not that different. Neo-nazis in Victoria get close to no jail time for being found guilty of their crimes. [Source 1 - sewell assaulting assaulting a security guard at Channel Nine headquarters gets only 150 hours community service](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-01-12/sewell-sentence-assault-nine-neo-nazi-white-supremacist/101847392), [Source 2 - sewell gets a 37-day jail term and his little nazi cumsock hersant gets off with community service after attacking Victorian hikers](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2024/mar/22/neo-nazi-victoria-hiker-attack-charges-thomas-sewell-jacob-hersant). Environmental protests get longer sentences for protesting [Source](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/article/2024/jul/08/blockade-australia-climate-activist-sentenced-to-three-months-in-jail-over-port-of-newcastle-protest-ntwnfb).
The police can't arrest their friends and colleagues
"We're here to help you, Mister Squire. Tell us about this armed attack on you."


"Well they coordinated outside the venue, then they tried to come in and assault us. So we defended ourselves against the Nazis--"


"Excuse me, they were Nazis? You're going away for a long time you piece of shit. Describe them again so we can give them money."
>Good people are arrested while bad people are protected

i blame our schools, they teach you that you can be the biggest pile of shit to someone as long as you can get them to lash out at you for doing it, then you get all the protection in the world
Lucky for the bastards they were only chased. I prefer they get dealt with the old-fashioned way
ASIO: we need to exist because Nazi threat 

Also ASIO: gotta maintain some threat so we continue to be needed
ASIO are on the side of capital, and always have been… during the Whitlam era they were reporting to the CIA but not the democratically elected government. Treasonous.
Seriously though, this is it. The Victorian judiciary aggressively takes their side. Every court case involving them has been a show trial. They filmed themselves racially insulting then beating an African man, and the judge let them off because they read poetry. Look it up.
England has an alt-right problem but their laws are tight enough that if you're caught walking around with anything pointier than a nail file you're in trouble.

Maybe we need to add a "no good cause" law to carrying pointy things.
Some of those that work forces are the same that burn crosses.
Because they can't charge him with assault on a police officer without outing someone
> In those cases, the defenders were lauded as heroes and rewarded for their courage.

You're forgetting the key factor, the skin tone of the aggressor, if it's anything darker than a swede with a sun tan it's a "terrorist", when it's a white person they're an "innocent, concerned citizen". White supremacy is a disease.
But did he calm down when the police arrived or was he antagonistic?
Be hard to find a jury that isn’t sympathetic to a Nazi fighter. Although not as hard as it should be…
They are also likely far more sympathetic to the beliefs of the Nazis, than their victims.
[removed]
I remember when a bunch of fash scumbags tried to adopt the white rose society name. Glad there are still anti fascists using it.
It gives me a warm and fuzzy feeling to see that Melbourne SHARPies are still around.

For those that don’t know, SHARP stands for Skin-Heads Against Racial Prejudice which is a decades old Anti-Fascist global subculture going back to the 1960’s in the UK and Australia.  Real Skinheads, not the fairies in boots that hide behind their swastikas and balaclavas.
very likely known to *be* police
>  were very likely known to the police

One of their Dads is a copper.  Very likely he’ll be a copper one day too.
> Second world war is a clear lesson: violence against Nazis is ethical and effective.

"Only one thing could have broken our movement — if the adversary had understood its principle and from the first day had smashed, with the most extreme brutality, the nucleus of our new movement."

Adolf Hitler himself admitted as much, a belief system founded upon violence only understands one thing and only has one solution.
Christchurch shooting being a prime example. I can't believe the scumbag livestreamed it but at least the Nazi fucks couldn't deny it happened.
and their children
Physically they can.
So the police are above the law? Or connected so the law doesn't apply to them? Does nobody watch the watchers?

Sounds like bad guys. Bad guys won't go after their fellow bad guy. Good people would (or should) go after bad people, even if they're in the same profession or 'above' them.
Or that you can just form a posse of sycophantic boot-licks that will do your bullying for you while you befriend the teachers. 

They'll use those skills for good I'm sure.
Ideology shaping the material reality of society is part of a feedback loop that goes both ways, but it's the weaker force.

It isn't arbitrary. Peoples thoughts, ideas, beliefs, laws, customs and so on are stochastically a function of the environment they find themselves in and their incentives real and perceived.

While correct, the moralising statement doesn't address *why* people are 'bad' based on somewhat of a consensus morality.

The ruling class is evil (having behaviour antithetical to the smooth functioning of a pro-social and cooperative society, which are values the working class learns out of necessity to some degree despite a concerted effort to quash them) because maintaining a status quo of exponentially accelerating wealth extraction (extracted from other people) is in their material interest.

Fascists are not a threat to the status quo; on the contrary they reinforce it. Even in the most extreme case, when the rivers of blood have been cleaned out from the streets the contemporary relations of production reassert themselves with greater force.

On the other hand, direct action by antifascists [which is necessary to avoid the afformentioned rivers] is unacceptable to the status quo because it represents organisation in the underclass and the first cracks in the monopoly of violence held by the state which enforces the present state of things.

All of this to say that this is a regular and predictable consequence of the laws of motion of money and the people that possess it. Something like this doesn't grow out of, say, an arbitrary choice not to discipline children.
Only 99 more scalps to go..
Pretty sure most states have had laws like that since the '90s.
We do. You need a lawful excuse to carry a knife, be that a pocket knife or kitchen knife.
Except they don't use those laws on the neo nazis and racist rioters.
>England has an alt-right problem but their laws are tight enough that if you're caught walking around with anything pointier than a nail file you're in trouble.

to be fair und England's laws if you are in the proximity of someone holding anything bigger then a nail file and refuse to search you as well you get arrested
Dude was arrested and the Nazis were not. How much more reason do you need for him to resist policing?

This is especially given that police were and still are used to brutalise indigenous people and minorities (and before you claim otherwise, read a paper, look at any recent history).
> when the police arrived

They never left tbh.
Birds of a feather and all that.
The fascists have always done this. It was National *Socialism* not because they believed in socialism. They opposed it, but they wanted to undermine its power.

The right stole the word libertarian from the left and were blatant about it.

Fash gonna fash.
It’s the same reason they don’t go hard on Domestic Violence. Too awkward to arrest the guys they share a break room with.
Some of those that work forces  
Are the same that burn crosses
They celebrate it.
I mean yes, it's shocking how many people still need to learn thier ACABs in this country.
> So the police are above the law?

Yes, they always have been, they exist purely to protect the interests of the capitalist ruling class and enable their monopoly on violence so as to keep us all under foot, leftists have been screaming this for centuries now.
Sure, blame schools and the teachers.
Yes. A pair of nail clippers will get you done. It's sad how bad things are. 


That being said,  a lot of kids running heavy purely because their idiot mates or some emotionally immature wanna be gangster does. 


It is a pain for people that like tp do a bit of macgyvering . Something like a leather man is a godsend, but a no go now. 
[Wikipedia says](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Libertarianism#History):

*"Anarchist communist philosopher Joseph Déjacque was the first person to describe himself as a libertarian[10] in an 1857 letter.[153] Unlike mutualist anarchist philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, he argued that "it is not the product of his or her labor that the worker has a right to, but to the satisfaction of his or her needs, whatever may be their nature"."*

So yeah.. not very left. I don't think you should want to reclaim that.
I work in an area with a lot of ex police 

The only one who isn't an active vile scumbag is the bloke who was in child protection focused on active pedophiles who left because he was disgusted by how little the police actually did about it.
> Yes. A pair of nail clippers will get you done. It's sad how bad things are. 

Do you have any evidence of that happening? Sounds like bullshit to me.
To me that sounds more like an "even if someone cant work enough to meet their own needs, even under socialism, those needs should still be met"

Which, um, yes?
If you can read that into it, you can read pretty much anything into it. Ayn Rand sure did. Isn't that the problem?
Nobody 'reads that into it' that quote states the sentiment plain and simple.
How do you not get it?
"Be selfish" is right there literally on the page. How many people do you know who want to satisfy their own needs *"whatever may be their nature"* - who are good, socially minded people. I suppose Napoleon and Stalin did.. I guess they are technically on the left if you want to split hairs.
The premise is that:

The earth contains enough to meet all human needs.

Some desire more than they need.

The actions of those who wish to meet their desires by sacrificing the needs of other can and should be prevented.
