How do these insurance companies getaway with this type of theft?
Just received insurance quote to continue for another year and it has jumped from  $1600 to $2,600!!!

This is literally daylight robbery!! 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Always shop around come renewal time. Being loyal gets you nothing anymore
I work in insurance, would be happy to help you via DM.

Insurance for home would be based on the rebuild and contents value of your home - it auto raises each year because of the cost of building going up, and your insurer assumes you buy things as is normal AND replace old/broken items with newer, better ones as you go.

You need to review the 'sum insured' to make sure what you have is right - broken down into both home and contents - contents to replace anything not fixed to the house - linens, furniture, clothing, electronics, small appliances, your fridge, TV, any trinkets you love, cookware, servingware... all that crap. MOST people I speak to keep no more than like, $60K, maybe $100K if they love high quality things.

Then is your building, and this one you should go off your insurers building replacement calculator, maybe add $50K if you want, and stick to that. Compare that figure and what you believe your contents to be worth to your renewal, and they will likely be quite different.

It would also be an idea to review your excess - how often would you want to claim? If you would only claim if you lost everything, and keep a decent savings where you could pay a higher excess, go a higher excess (just means you would hardly ever claim, if ever), or go lower if you have accidental damage/loss and WOULD claim often. 

these are the steps I'd start with, but also look at what matters to you when it comes to insurance, any particular things you would want covered and make sure your policy covers it - things like damage caused by pets - MANY insurers will not cover the damage if your own pet causes it, only that of a wild animal or your neighbours. Same thing with fire damage for contents - I know for a fact RAC will not cover smoke damage for contents if the flame wasn't at YOUR address, but say your neighbours burnt their house down, and the smoke smell has ruined your carpets, curtains and your sofa, you just can't get the smell out - some insurers, you'd be fine, but with RAC you're SOL.

Again OP, more than happy to help you :)
You're lucky.  My moved up in a similar fashion last year. Expecting more again next month.
Car or home? My home insurance has gone up 25% since last year (RACV).
Bingle was like half the price of racv and aami. Take the risk
Reinsurance costs have gone up
You probably live somewhere impacted by climate change. Unfortunately with the huge increase in natural disasters houses are more likely to be damaged.
Many insurance companies will entice new customers with a 'lower' rate for the first few years then go up knowing you are very unlikely to move.

Its also mindful to remember that they're all publically listed companies that our Superannuation is likely to be invested in. We want growth. Australia is a mature market so  growth only comes from savings (payout less) or income (increasing premiums...)
the issue is the replacement value to rebuild your home. Mine went from $350k to $550k. I can’t get anyone to insure my house for much less.

Has building a house gone up that much in the last year or two?
61% doesn't sound right. We don't know where you live, but there's some mad reason its going up. Brisbane flood zone? Downtown Alice Springs? Bushfires take out your area every ten years? 

Shop around, check you're getting the coverage you will need if the worse happens.
[deleted]
It’s not theft if you are choosing to pay it 🤦🏻‍♂️
Because idiots pay it
This. My car insurance was with Budget and jumped up an extra $50. So I shopped around and got a better deal with GIO for half of what I had been previously paying. 

They just expected people to be lazy and cop the increase.
I did this recently for my car. Dismayed that the renewal offer beats whatever the meerkats have to offer me.
Mine went up from $1400 to $1900 and comparing prices showed that this was still the cheapest available, so whilst it's definitely good advice, I still just think that every company hiked their prices massively over the last year.
Not OP but I have a question. I live in a townhouse complex and I own mine. Body corporate covers some building insurance. I have contents insurance but I’m worried that it’s not enough. Like what would happen if something internal went to shit, e.g. internal roof collapse or internal fire damage?
Home
Where in Oz could someone live without insurance companies claiming this rort though?
The very short answer is yes it's up over 20%

Nobody will underinsure you because they're not allowed to knowingly do so, and even when it happens the claimant usually goes to the regulators and media complaining that they shouldn't have been allowed to underinsure and the claim has to be paid anyway.

It also bears keeping in mind that insurance costs more than a regular build because depending on the policy your temporary accommodation may come out of that amount as well as the cost of clearing the debris in the event of a total loss. Those two could easily be 50-100k in total.
Nah, sunny coast, not surrounded by bush land, on a hill so no flood or bushfire.
Well, our health insurance is likely going to go up after half the country goes into therapy to recover from the mental anguish of watching Raygun pretend to be a kangaroo in an internationality televised breakdancing competition...
Who said I’m paying it? I received the notice today and thought I’d bring it here.
That's fortunate. As a male through my mid 20s to mid 30s with a spotless record, I've not been able to get a better deal from a mainstream insurance company versus Budget on any renewal offer.
That would be under your building insurance through the body corp to fix the structure, and contents you keep to replace anything of yours. 
What I usually recommend those under a strata do is have a look for the policy you have under the strata, take the total sum insured and divide it by the number of buildings covered - that right there is how much your specific property is covered for, building wise.

Review it each year and ask them to raise the figure each year at your annual meeting if they aren’t already. Have a look at the insurers site to see what they do and don’t cover, take careful note of the exclusions. 
Some companies do let you take out building cover for say, $100k for what isn’t covered by strata, but it is harder because strata is designed to cover anything for the building itself. 

If you’re worried about your contents, all you need to do is look at the level of cover you have (and it sounds like limits and exclusions are a big worry of yours), and make sure it suits your needs, that’s kind of all you can do, but reviewing it regularly and making sure you’re with the right insurer is what matters. 

I’d be happy to help you via DM too! You’re welcome to send me through who you’re with, your renewal with all personal info blacked out, and what you’re specifically worried about and we can take a look together.
Alice is pretty stable
How are they taking the money from you then? Where’s the theft?
