
I mean, imagine if J Attack wins gold after last night. He will be a national hero.
A quick google and this one is legit good and has plenty of videos on YouTube of competition dancing.
What he does actually looks impressive, and not like my mum trying to get up after a fall on a wet floor.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PqDMls2inXw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PqDMls2inXw)

edit: If the guy does the same routine in some kind of protest against something, it's still a bit shitty. I'm sure there are people out there that actually care about the art and lifestyle which could have taken her place. 

I hope she is an undercover journalist like the dude was in the Spanish basketball team was and exposes some corruption, but it's a strange way to do it.
With absolute respect to the break dancing community, this should not be an olympic sport.
Breaking news! Hehe
Absolutely cooked judging, I don't know what the fuck they were scoring for J Attack. 

Anything impressive results in points deducted.
does anyone know how breaking is actually scored here??? wouldn’t say im a professional at break dancing but how did j attack only get 1 vote he did so well (albeit seeming a bit nervous) 🛐. the commentators mentioned putting in fancy moves with no flow but he seemed to stick it quite well with the music??? there needs to be some form of criteria bc even for one of the Japanese breakers the scoring was nuts
[deleted]
Crank the laser lights up and my epileptic brother could have done a better job
He wasn’t bad at all
He actually was a very good breakdancer
I hope he's channelling Bradbury
Nobody thought RayGun was the bomb!
I’m not sure if a bloke named Jeff will be Australia’s redemption
The bomb or A bomb? 🤔
Couldn't be much worse. 
Wow these guys are doing insane shit, get rid of rhythmic gymnastics and put this in its place.
Would be nice if channel 9 actually worked.  Had to watch the Olympics on a Korean channel instead.
even if he's good, ukraine is stiff competition, they know how to fuck up stronger opponents than themselves and they know how to rave.

That's a dangerous combo.
Oh no, his going to wear the same cricket uniform isnt he..
I’m convinced that they added breakdancing to the Olympics purely for the publicity factor, knowing that people would (rightfully) react like this
Oh god there’s more of them. Well, I’m looking forward to another laugh.
Redemption time
unlikely he cane 67th or something in the World championships. Always a chance, but the subjective nature of this, means its n ot like he can just pull a PB out of nowhere to win.   
But yes he is talented, i suspect everyone else is more talented though.
But Raygun is a national hero. She's the harambe of a generation.
Raygun went out 18-0, 18-0, 18-0, losing all six rounds.

J Attack went out 17-1, 18-0, 17-1, losing all six rounds.  That's two points more than infinitely better.
But does he have a phd?
Holy shit he is good! I wonder what the level of competition is.
I opened the link thinking I was gunna get to see some old bint taking a slip
>I'm sure there are people out there that actually care about the art and lifestyle which could have taken her place. 

Then why didn't they? ... There was nothing stopping them from pursuing it. They had 3 and a half years after it was announced to prepare.

This is what I don't understand about all of this shade ... Where the fuck was all the "top talent" of Women's Breaking in Australia that everyone is claiming would have gone in her place?

I personally think the fact that she was Australia's pick, whether it's because she was fairly or unfairly deemed the most talented, or because nobody more talented bothered to qualify, or because nobody more talented passed the pre-screening, is a FAR bigger reflection on the Breaking community in Australia not being able to get their shit together, than it is on her.
This is chalk and cheese compare to what Raygunn did.
of course she cares about it, it's the area she has specialised in for years now both academically and actively. People have brain rot, jesus christ
It’s spart bro. It’s at the intersection of sport and art.
The men's redeemed it, doesn't seem any less legitimate to me than rhythmic gymnastics or synchronised swimming - but I doubt we will see it again
He doesn't have his own style. He crashed quite a lot of his powermoves. His transitions are always the same (ie powermoves into a baby freeze)
I thought the same thing. How is there such a big gap between Attack and the Ukrainian?? He’s become Ivan Drago.
Powermoves rarely win matches. Judges look for musicality, having their own unique style/flavour, using smooth transitions into different levels of the floor.
He's actually good tho, unlike a certain someone
He smashed it, and is only 16!
Just a more traditional bomb.
she nuked her chances of winning
I love youse all
Hey, at least you got better commentary.
This is the dumbest shit I’ve ever heard, and I’m all for it. I have never considered the combination of those two things, but fuck me it’s a scary thought.
Alas, it is not to be. 🤦‍♀️
That's the genius of Raygun. She performed like that so the judges feel sympathy on J Attack for him to win a surprise gold.
to be fair two of his opponents were in the gold medal matchup, and the other had a fourth in the world championships. Taking any votes at all was an achievement, and he looked like he belonged there to me.
I thought he was done dirty in the first round. Round 2 the Ukrainian guy definitely had him though, can understand all the judges voting that way there. He was actually competing, not taking the piss.
Pretty Huge D? Looking at his move, I'd say yes.
Sure he knows how to *actually* breakdance, but has he studied the **politics** of breakdancing?! That's the big question...
Half the kids that dance at PHDs (Pure Hard Dance) club in Melbourne would be able to pull off better moves and they aren’t even break dancers.
https://youtu.be/UTsnJ7sdK88?si=7SeG9mtUrjlB8tbK

This guy is good
He is up against Kuzya. Alas, J Attack will be destroyed.
It wasn't really an organised sport before it was added to the Olympics, and many still don't see it as a 'sport'. The organisation that picked Australia's competitors was basically formed for that purpose. I don't think it was quite as easy as you make out to do it all from scratch
More like sugar and shit.
She could have cared enough to get good at it.
She has no excuse then to not know how bad she is at it.
Look, I fully acknowledge it's a difficult art, and some of them are incredibly athletic.. but the olympics?
I think you mean Shart.
Or Ars
See, that's what was lacking in the whole presentation of this competition. 

What looks good to the average person may not be what impresses the judges. Where is the guides on what merits points, in fact, why is there not better commentary while it's going on so we can understand it better. 

Whole thing is a shit show, could have and should have been organised and presented better.
In this horrible war i've watched on as i've lost so many mates who lived there, including russians who didn't want to be part of it who got sent off to be slaughtered wanting  no part in it who are likely now in prison or dead, and countless mates in ukraine who died fighting for their freedom.

Made many new friends supporting them and mate, their fighting spirit and determination to hold onto freedom and things worth living for is fucking admirable. Meeting them playing chess on your phone, donating them means to survive and seeing moments of humanity where they're having recovery raves where a dj blasts some beats while they sift through a bombed out building to clear it and get accomodation back up, make an area safe from unexploded ordinance, get a hospital up and running, it's nothing short of admirable.

I've served with a lot of good people in my life but the Ukranians are something else and the fact they're still sending out people for sports and art shows how committed they are to ensure their culture and way of life that they want to keep fighting for survives sums up their sheer determination to survive in more ways than just making it to tomorrow.

One of the mates I had from the ukraine subreddits who's been helping to defend their home summed it up perfectly, how he's lost track of days in the trenches and the horrors he's seen there and survived, but he can count everytime he's had a pass back home where when there is metal played he will mosh, when there is dubstep and hip hop he will be mad on the d-floor, so the trenches may be where he dies, but the music is where he lives.

Respect that.
2 out of 54. Even if he could break-dance, such scores like this show that break dancing should not have been included as an Olympic sport.
Top tier team strategy. No one seen it coming
Rayguns had more eyes on her than anyone bar Imane Khelif or Gojira out of the whole games tbh. 

The onlyfans reveal is gonna go off
I watched a vid of him on the ABC - he looked pretty capable in comparison to our other entrant.
I watched this and he was robbed he destroyed that round. The problem is whether it be the negative impression from new reports due to the Aussie woman dancer or the fact that most of the judges are friends with the older competitors I think he should have got way better score for the first rounds
Yes officer, this one right here.
Hopefully it doesn’t get in the way and cost him a medal.
That'd be a killer song if it's anything like "politics of dancing"
After watching this, I kind of understand why this can be an Olympic sport. Raygun made me think it was a competition to mop the floor.
I saw some head-plows. I guess it's a legitimate move after all.
I don't know how the Oceanic championship works but she was seemingly the best we had
Exactly and bragging about her breaking and academic talents on The Project 10 months prior means she has zero insight into how bad she is, she actually thinks she is awesome at it. 
to be fair, apparently they didn't want to be in the olympics either. the IOC thought it would appeal to the youth instead of ballroom dancing. Which is what the dance sport bosses apparenly wanted instead.
Some of them are incredibly talented.
Hahahaha! Thanks for the chuckle. It’s such a weird sport to have at the olympics.
поважай це
Tangent
It's just the way the scoring system works I think, it tends to produce very skewed scores
The daggy uniform probably didn't help either
Why is break dancing associated with youth? I think of 20 year olds back in the 90s when I think of break dancing. Those guys are 55 year olds now.
I'm definitely biased as a former ballroom dancer, but at least then they would have had a ready made pool of athletes who are pre-ranked and have dedicated years to their craft. Also I'm not sure anyone would have been talking about the break dancing at all if it wasn't for this, so that's kind of a fail at attracting a younger audience.
The youth of the early 90s?
if they wanted that then esports would be a better bet, im pretty sure they were it talks about doing that?
I firmly believe motorsport and darts should be Olympic sports. There is a clear winner, and fat people can be hero's
Then they need to overhaul the entire thing before thinking about reintroducing the sport again
Yeah I'm in my 40s and I don't think it was even my youth
Good point, they would have had better luck with shuffling...
Ballroom dancing is so beautifully camp—maybe I’m biased too (I did it as a kid), but I feel like The Youth™️ are more likely to vibe with something that owns its campiness… and to me there’s something about breakdancing being gentrified\* into the Olympics that makes it cringey?? But maybe I’m just uncomfortable with the earnestness of some forms of dance, idk. 

\*idk if that’s an accurate use of the term, but
It's been there in the background. It's just not mainstream. I'm just not sure WHAT they achieved with this.
80's TY
Maybe? It was a weird choice to be fair.
Darts would be epic
You’ve really no idea about motorsports and accurate on darts.
If they really wanted to attract younger viewers something like parkour would have been a much better choice. It has roots in France and has a cool factor pretty much on par with skateboarding for the average person. Break dancing was a truly baffling choice.
As an Aussie, I think I am well versed in motorsports, and the unfairness of F1, good sir. I might have been out of line with the fat people and motorsport, but judging by our breakdancing performance, a fat dude in a commodore is our best bet.
It's the IOC. I Think they were trying to put in a dance comp that was going to appeal to the youth. I agree it's a really baffling choice.
