They always seem so expensive, I’ve found they seem to be priced reasonably on crazysales but hoping someone else can give some alternative options with decent range 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
I got a cardboard one from Kmart which my cat didn’t really use. 

I got a taller one that he can scratch on the bottom and sit on the top from Big W Marketplace and he barely uses it. 

So I would recommend making one with carpet offcuts or rope with recycled materials or maybe check fb marketplace coz spending money on such things really isn’t worth it!
Kmart is my first port of call - they actually have good stuff

Other than that I check the sale sections of Pet Circle, Petstock etc websites. I bought a cat play tunnel on Temu so that's probably another cheap place
I get the Anko wave ones from Kmart on Ebay, I glue two together to make a couch for the cat and he loves them. They double as a scratching post. The cat almost lives on them. He hates sissal scratching posts and he never used the cat tree but he loves the wave couch.
He has a walk-through self-grooming thing from Ebay but prefers the soft brushes I get from the local two dollar shop.
I got a great little cardboard haunted house from Kmart at Halloween last year and my spooky black cat LOVES it. It’s got a scratching pad inside and she’ll hang out in there for hours.
I got mine from Costco, I think it was around $120 but it was so worth it. I have two cats, one of them is very big so needed a large sturdy one that’ll last a long time and I haven’t had any issues. My cats love it.
I find that the bigger cat trees don't have the best resale value, so I've gotten mine from facebook marketplace... Especially if you can do some basic handyman stuff to replace rope etc, you can get an absolute bargain.


Otherwise I'll wait for the sales and use price trackers like https://buywisely.com.au/ or https://au.camelcamelcamel.com/ to try and buy the expensive one at the best possible price.
I saw a nice one at the Cat Haven made from a large tree branch, added bonus is buying from there helps their funding.
I got this [cat tower](https://www.bunnings.com.au/i-pet-cat-tree-145cm-tower-scratching-post-scratcher-wood-condo-house-large-bed_p0311511) from Bunnings Market place and it's big enough for my five chonkers
Go to a carpet place and get remnants and make a post out of that, 4x2s, and ply.
I bought my cat tree from Bunnings, I can’t see it on the website anymore but it was $160 on special and is 178cm tall. My two cats absolutely adore it. 
Other cat scratching boards etc I get from Kmart, like the wave ones. I never spend much because they always reject expensive stuff. 
I’ve also bought single carpet squares from Bunnings which are my cat’s “scratching carpet” that she’s allowed to scratch - $9 worth every cent.
[This](https://www.petbarn.com.au/kazoo-cat-scratch-post-charcoal-l-56x112cm) is the post we have. Yes it's $120. But it's also super tall and thick, our cat can even sit on the top of it. We originally had one that was about $60 that was shorter and thinner and she uses this one way more. 

If you (or someone you know) have a Costco membership they have some decently priced towers.
Big W ones are okay they are $10 and the last a little while before I have to replace it
catch/kogan/dick smith
I bought an expensive post from Omlet that my cats love. It also doesn’t wear out and all parts are replaceable. 

I also bought sisal mats from Amazon quite cheap, you can screw them into the wall or use these sticker things to stick it on a tiled or wooden floor. I stuck one on floor boards a few months ago and I has stayed well, they use it all the time and even just sit on it
I just got a huge 92cm post off eBay for $40, free postage. I wish I could post a photo
Cats are fickle creatures, how can you be sure it will actually use a scratching post you buy?
just go to bunnings and pick up a cardboard box at the checkout
Sometimes the Reject Shop does have some decent cat stuff too, it's not all bad.
I might be stupid but I can't picture how you're glueing the two wave ones together? Is it side by side to make it wider, or something else?


I ask because this sounds like a great solution for my girl lol, gotta spoil the princess
Those are so cute. I got a little beach shack one for my cat, but he is a massive unit and barely fits through the door with half his back end hanging out. 

Fairly sure I’ve also seen them at the reject shop in various designs!
We have one like that but it’s squared rather than cylindrical :)

We’re actually looking for more of a tree that they can sleep in with beds at the top. They cost so much in stores though, trying to find one or a decent size under $200 is near impossible!
Yes I supa-glue two together side by side to make it wider. The shape is perfect for him to stretch out on, I have couple of them in the house. He also uses them to sharpen his claws.
Kmart always seems to be out of stock of them, they're only about $6.00 each and as they wear they do shed a bit of cardboard, but he absolutely loves them. I find them on Ebay, just a bit more costly. If you can't get them the Reject Shop has similar ones more expensive and not as good but still OK.

You're not silly at all. I got tired of spending money on things he didn't use and these are great.
The other thing he likes is a horseshoe shaped scratcher from Ebay but I supa glued it to keep it stable. That was only cheap too. Plus soft flexible brushes from a 2 dollar store.
Anything expensive I bought turned out to be a waste of money and he loves the cheaper stuff.
Also the wand toys (Purina brand) that Woolworths sometimes has, the very long fluffy one with feathers on the end, about $15 and he likes it better than anything else.
We have [this tree ](https://www.petstock.com.au/products/petpals-midnight-molly-perch-cat-scratcher-variant-132811000350?queryID=532753c311584f4b3c03c98f0e8b3c89) but it's $219. 

Otherwise the 3 I can see on the Costco website are $90, $119 and $120. One of them is 2m tall. 

Pet circle also look like they've got some for under $200. But I don't know exactly what you're after in terms of height.
Also I got a second hand Ottoman from an Op Shop and he loves sitting on top of it in the middle of the lounge room. Cost about five dollars.
People have left photos of the wave scratchers put together on the reviews section on the Kmart page.
We have a few cats so the larger the beds on top the better. Those ones you’ve linked would be great if we just had the one but they do like to cosy up together as high as they can. 

And the wider the beds on top the more stability the whole thing needs which means larger+more money. 

Surely some decent options around that won’t involve me having to Frankenstein a few together like we’ve done in the past 😂
I have that one too. Lasted for 8 yrs of daily use, 3 cats, but it's finally falling apart. Occasionally it goes on special for $30 or so cheaper.
Ah bummer. The only ones that come to mind to possibly suit multiple cats are ones from cat tree king but they're very pricey. But they are extra large towers (I think they're made with Maine Coons in mind maybe?).
