
I would like to know what the appalling hold up is with the Ben Roberts Smith case. Reading this article does make me wonder what's going on behind the scenes and if he has sympathisers that are stalling the case. There are credible claims against him of war crimes in Afghanistan during the period 2005-2016. Credible enough that his defamation suit against media failed on a truth defence. That's at least 8 years ago. The Brererton Report/Afghanistan Inquiry recommended consideration of criminal charges and was published in 2020. That's 4 years ago. To my knowledge he has still not been charged. In that time, he's been in and out of the country, allegedly tampered with evidence (including *literally* burying it in his backyard), had ample opportunity to potentially intimidate witnesses, etc. The delay is terrible for so many reasons. Not least because he appears to have wrecked more lives in the years since returning from war, being an alleged DV perp in addition to an alleged war crim. What a travesty. Call me silly, but I also don't love the idea that an alleged murderer is out in the community for more than 4 years without any charge. There's plenty of reasons this case needs to go to court asap.
I looked up his Wikipedia expecting to see that he was somehow tied to Kerry Stokes - but couldn’t see anything substantive.

All the more baffling that he would blow up what appears to be a life of career milestones.
Maybe he has time to reflect on the Bali 9.
Ha ha.
I think they are dragging their feet in the hope that the whole mess will go away.

I hope it doesn't, and I hope they charge everyone complicit in the commission, and the cover-up of the alleged War Crimes.

Mr Robert-Smith was awarded a coronation medal from King Charles in June this year.
> I would like to know what the appalling hold up is with the Ben Roberts Smith case.

The link below was from 10 months ago, I haven't heard anything since.
Apart from the whistleblower David McBride being jailed, of course.

[More than 20 prosecutors receive specialised training on how to run war crimes cases](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/sep/26/commonwealth-prosecutors-received-special-training-on-how-to-run-war-crimes-cases)
He blew up the reputation of our country and one of the truly most elite units in the world. That's why I don't understand why so many want to defend this scumbag. 

  There is no real connections to the real credo of the warrior soldier who had to be a smart scholar and a a soldier that had to be the best of the best rather than be a violent bully thug.  

He trashed  the name of our country and insulted the moniker of the SAS globally.  However I also blame the command structure that allowed a crazy like him to bully his way to the top bypassing all the checks and balances that should have kept a lone wolf crazy like him out of the SAS. They would have seen BRS coming like a steam train off the rails.
Sorry I made a comment thinking you weren't sure about the link between Kerry Stokes and BRS but you meant Mick. 
Hard to see them being this intelligent when the cunt is featured in 4 different areas of the national war memorial. Including a giant arse portrait of him and his fucking uniform on a mannequin.

Sickening.
Starting to think he has friends in high places
That's true but it was automatically given, not specific to him. I would imagine that since it's ' before the courts' as the saying goes, there were concerns about actively intervening to block it just for him. 
Any “…intervening to block it just for him”, rather than for war crimes, would be wrong.
