Anyone else noticing more and more ads creeping into Stan's "ad-free" Olympics coverage?
First tiles covering entire rows in the Olympics menu, and now banner ads across the bottom of the screen *during* sports coverage. It's bullshit they can advertise "ad-free", take money, and then still shove ads in your face. Who do we report it to who will actually give a shit?  
  
(Yeah yeah, I know it's owned by Nine and they're... well... Nine, but it's still fucked and shouldn't be allowed.)
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
No. But sick of the Stan app kicking me out of watching a live event every 2mins.
No. I've been quite happy with the no ads experience on stan tbh. It's not cheap, but literally 0 ads.
You can watch it for free elsewhere. Stan sucks.
Can't say I've noticed any, no.
I’m getting the worst buffering. I’ve tried everything it’s really annoying
You're not getting the banner ads constantly? I just got 3 in the women's final for bouldering...
https://i.imgur.com/SzEuBil.jpeg  
https://i.imgur.com/nBBdTqB.jpeg
3rd was for a Matilda's doco
The 9Now app is free and I’ve seen 1 ad in the last 2 hours. They don’t really show ads
Got any suggestions where I can watch opening ceremony for free. I've not had a lot of luck there.
My Stan experience has been excellent. Although I’m not that into sport, so will be dropping the sport package in a couple of days.
I gave up at the start of the last quarter. I missed the 2 penalty shots because it kicked me
From live action back to the menu from the game. Nothing wrong with my internet at the time, I had speeds of 228/27. 

The water polo was the only event I have tried to watch live and that was my experience
I also got these ads in the weightlifting, and I also paid the $15 for the Olympic coverage on Stan. You're not alone
Are you actually on ad free plan? Did you double check?
Honestly nope. I'm not getting those ads
I have not seen a single ad on Stan all Olympics and I bloody love it. Aside from a few sporting company logos on uniforms, the whole Olympics has been completely pure and maybe we can have nice things after all.
I've been getting these too, very disappointing.
There isn't a "with ads" option for Stan sports, only ad-free.
Same here
