Anybody else getting the ole "drop off mark as delivered" but they won't even knock or ring the doorball these days? Just curious if it's common in other areas for this?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Honestly, fuck Menulog full stop. 

The few times we've tried them, we've had to lodge complaints, either it was missing food, eaten food, or no delivery altogether. 

They are the worst of the worst.
Seems to be the norm since COVID when they had to go contactless. You can often change your delivery preferences in the apps, but I'm not sure about Menulog as I don't use it
It is a food delivery service.  Your food was delivered.  If you are unhappy with the service, take your business elsewhere.  That is how commerce works.

I appreciate that there are some individuals who rely upon a certain level / type of service.  Hopefully there are providers capable of meeting those needs.  If you are one of those individuals, I hope you find an alternative that meets your needs.

Perhaps you could seek out businesses that use their own drivers, rewarding those businesses with repeat custom.
Just be an adult and go get your own food
That's the way I prefer it, zero contact with the delivery person. No-contact delivery is what I've got set and that's what I want.

Occasionally I get one who knocks/rings and waits at the door to hand it to me instead of just dropping it off and returning to their car, they get rated down.


The cosmic ballet, goes on.
Wouldn't it be the place you are ordering from and the delivery driver to blame for missing, eaten or no delivery? Menulog facilitate the order they don't prepare or deliver it.
If you pay for a service, you expect to receive it.  If you're able adult you should be able to drop off the goods and either knock or ring the bell to indicate that it has been delivered. You'd be the type of wanker who cracks the shits if the postie left a slip when you're at home (if the service has been paid for, then why the fuck shouldn't you receive it). Paying for a service such as menulog/Uber eats ECT doesn't mean you should be fucked over because of it.

Jesus Christ I've heard from people with disabilities who need to rely on these to actually get food because they can't cook themselves and the government has fucked them over. It's cheaper to use these services then getting delivered by the supermarkets.

We live in a society where if you pay for a service you should receive it (hell, it's a bloody legal requirement). If you can't  provide the service you should fuck right off. It's a breach of contract as it is.

Maybe you should go back and tell people not to call the cops for a potential safety issue with somebody who may be around their property without consent?

Fuck straight off with the whole "be an adult and d it yourself" that's a crock of fucking shit. There are times when you just don't have the time to go down and get ripped off by Woolworths, get home to cook it after work.

If you pay for something, you expect to receive it from what the service provides.
The delivery driver yes, the restaurant would only be if they are the ones delivering.

Menulog provides ways to state additional delivery instructions if needed, but at the end it's on not just the drivers, but menulog to properly facilitate their requirements onto the driver's.
If you pay for a service with the full knowledge that the company that provides that service treats their “staff” like dogshit and pays them below a living wage, then frankly you deserve cold nuggets
Sounds like someone didn’t enjoy their cold nuggets…
Menulog aren't the ones making or delivering your food, all they do is provide a platform for the places that failed you. If you aren't happy then talk to the place you ordered from.
