A backgrounder on the outrage in breaking circles at how their competition was highjacked for the Olympics, which also explains how a nobody from Australia got to compete.

https://www.news.com.au/sport/olympics/travesty-how-the-olympics-breaking-farce-was-allowed-to-happen/news-story/b6ff855d78232f4e6d7da82e7475bc64
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
This is the most Kath and Kim thing to happen to Australia for at least a decade.
I’m curious to know how the qualifiers were advertised and if people even knew they were happening. Only 15 girls competed and some of them ended up at an alternative global qualifying event where they finished 4th last, 3rd last and last. Was it just a group of ballroom dancers who were told they had a couple of years to learn breaking?

I’ve seen street performers around Australia and people in music videos do much more impressive things. Hell even a grooms party at a wedding I went to pulled out a few head spins!
All I know is that come October 31st, there’s gonna be a lot of 30 yr old women in green and gold lawn bowls track suits trick-or-treating around the neighbourhood
The problem is probably there is a lack of requirements for breakdancing.

Correct me if I'm wrong but in gymnastics floor routine they need to do like 4 - 6 tumbles.

On gymnastics rings they have to do certain positions etc..

If they actually made breakdancing rules e.g. 1 x air freeze, 1 x floor flare, 1 x air flare in every routine then maybe it would eliminate all the people who just dont have the physical fitness and skills from making it to the olympics.
According to Wikipedia "She is coached by her husband, Samuel Free, and trains for three to four hours a day."
I hope that's somebody's sense of humor and not the truth.
Napoleon Vegemite
Someone call Baz Luhrmann and Paul Mercurio I smell a sequel.
[removed]
As someone with a PhD on the subject, she was exactly the person that could have pointed officials to the actual Australian break dancers.
Hijacked by ballroom dancing lol
She is 100% going to be dropping an academic article in six months examining in-group/out-group reactions to breaking at the Olympics through the lens of gendered social media responses, with particular consideration for the role of authenticity in reception by groups without prior knowledge and experience of the subculture and its relationship to white supremacy.
Breaking Bad
So it sounds like we were given an automatic place, regardless of who we had to send. But, why? Also seems that Rach was fully aware she had no chance against the types she knew would be there.
Seeing them in their cricket uniform looking outfits was so cringe.
The exact same situation is happening to parkour. The Federation for Gymnastics (FIG) is hijacking parkour and trying desperately to enter it into the Olympics. These greedy organisations get lots of Olympic cash, the athletes that oppose the inclusion get left behind while the athletes that support it have to deal with an organisation that doesn't understand the culture and spirit of the sport.
It was like watching my 50yr old aunty get drunk and dance at the Xmas party.
Who knew a stupid idea would turn out to be stupid?
If she was in a Battle Rap her lines will be

“Roses are red,
Violets are blue,
Look at me, hop, hop, hop,
Im a kangaroo!”

🎤Mic drop
I don’t what disappoints me more, Raygun’s inclusion and performance, or that I’m agreeing with what I think is a well-written news.com.au article.
An Olympic official came out saying that, Raygun knew she couldn't keep up with the younger competitors, and so decided to go out and 'have a go' which is what we should teach our children and why she should be celebrated. 

I'm sorry, but the time to 'have a go' at this sort of thing is at a low stakes community event or (let's be honest) four vodka and sodas deep at your cousins wedding. Not the Olympics.
“Australia in the house” was the funniest bit
She wanted to compete so she entered. If she didn't know she sucked despite having a PhD studying it then that's not only a failure of Olympic sports to properly plan out qualifying competitions but also of tertiary education lol
AusBreak is officially recognised as the selection body and this was the eligible pool of  B-Boy and B-Girl competitors for Australia, it was not a competitive field for the B-girls since it was really small - presumably most of the competitors had day jobs and couldn't afford to take time off work. 

[https://circle-terrier-kpr6.squarespace.com/news/ausbreaking-crew](https://circle-terrier-kpr6.squarespace.com/news/ausbreaking-crew)
So, the World DanceSport Federation hijacked breaking - a dance form it had never previously been involved with - because it knew it couldn't get ballroom dancing in. Okaaaaay.

>Rachael “Raygun” Gunn was set up to fail.

It explains much. I'm starting to feel a bit sorry for her.
I think a critical question that is unanswered is how did Raygun win the qualifiers in Sydney vs other b-girls? There were 14 breakers that were worse than her?!?
Her partner AKA coach is just as horrible...you can see the connection
I don't get why we have to compete in every single event.  

Hopefully that's the last time we see this debacle of a sport
So she has a PhD in cultural studies and teaches *about* breaking, hip-hop culture.   So the old saying 'those who can't, teach' has been proven.
Thanks a lot for sharing this article. Super interesting and explains a lot, I am not speaking about Gunn's performance, but all the other performances I have watched, males and females alike. I could not understand it, could not get the ruling during the battles, why flow and choreography are more important than Power Moves, why power moves were not matched by opponents. It's like saying to a gymnast on floor that the choreography is more important than the technicality. 

Now I understand the outrage amongst the Hip Hop communities. 

Let it remain an art form and not a sport form.
"People may say I can't ~~sing~~ break, but no one can ever say I didn't ~~sing~~ break." – ~~Florence Foster Jenkins~~ Rachael "Raygun" Gunn
I just wanted to say… the 🦘 break move is going down in the history books forever
It's like watching a dying insect 😆
The fact that she has a PhD in breakdancing and judges /teaches kids at Macquarie university shows that there is a massive problem there lol 

She can't dance AT ALL. LOL
It's just a byproduct of how the Olympics is organised. It's not "here's the best 16, 50 or 100 athletes at this sport", it's about each nation or region sending their best with a maximum amount of athletes from each nation able to compete.

So you end up with Archers ranked in the Top 10 in the world unable to compete because their the 4th best South Korean archer, while people ranked 500th compete because they're the best in their country. 

So the champions of Oceania, Africa, Europe, Asia, the America's and the World Champion got a spot. Then there was a qualifier series for 10 final spots for those who didn't make it through the continental championships .

Oceania had 15, Africa had 13. While Europe, Asia and the America's had qualifiers for the qualifiers. 

Unsurprisingly Oceania and Africa failed to win a round, and the African competitor only got two "votes". If either us or Morocco weren't part of Oceania or Africa we wouldn't have qualified. Just like how if you were the 4th best Korean Archer you'd qualify every time if you were from anywhere else. 

Feel it's rough to pin it all on her and act like she didn't earn her way there. 

Considering people abuse qualification processes by using a grandparent to get a passport and then simply turning up to as many events as they can without actually doing any tricks in Snowboarding to get qualification points, or you have countries like Qatar giving passports to athletes so they can represent them, and then if they don't do well they just kick then out of the country.  

Yeah she's terrible, but she won the qualification event she needed too. Blame it on the Olympic process.
This is no travesty.

If Rachel 'Raygun' Gunn, and a posse of new wave Aussie b-boys and b-girls (soon to be known as 'The Gunners') aren't performing this exact dance at the opening ceremony in Brisbane, THAT will be a travesty.
> Australia had no recognised national federation so, as reported by the SMH, Gunn took up the challenge.
“It was like, ‘Well this is in [the Olympics] now’,” she said.
“So we’d better make sure that we’re not being misrepresented. People were really worried about what happened in the ’80s, where the narrative kind of got carried away from what breaking was, and a lot of the culture and the history was lost.

Is she for real! A white middle-aged woman (and I'm a white middle-aged aged man WHO ACTUALLY SPENT TIME BREAKING AS A KID IN THE 80'S, my neighbours had the cardboard dance floor and all) representing the "culture" is about as authentic as my fat white arse doing the same.

This woman should be ashamed of herself for embarrassing Australia, break dancing, sport, the Olympics and *coolness* in her quest for an internet moment.

What a joke. For once I agree with news
On one hand I feel terrible for the barrage of criticism she’s copped, rightfully or not and she’s a legend for memeing her way into a bullshit sport. 
And on the other hand, there’s every chance she’s done this in a completely selfish manner, knowing exactly how this was going to play out and she can go get fucked.
Commonwealth brother here from Canada.   We felt some second hand embarrassment for you guys.

Even our men's gold medal winner wasn't anything amazing compared to most breakdancers, but Raygun was just...wow.
"The “B-Girl” said she came to Paris wanting to leave a mark - and she has certainly done that."

She left a skidmark on the pants of the breakdancing community.
real strange they don't mention Raygun's history with Ballroom Dancing Australia
Honestly at first I thought it was a skit, a joke, it took me reading a few different sources to realise it was real, that’s how fucking bad it was. It’s embarrassing and I don’t care for people saying props to her she had a go, it’s the Olympics not a fucking talent show at the local primary school fair
What’s hilarious to me is that the IOC apparently thought that this would bring a fresh, hip, young audience to the Olympics. Break dancing hit its peak of cultural relevancy about 40 years ago. At least in America, it’s viewed as a kind of corny oddity from a bygone era like disco dancing or doing the Hustle. The event is the definition of old, out of touch people trying to be cool.
Ok. Now we're finally challenging what shouldn't be an Olympic sport, can we move into some of the ones silly ones too
The only way it could been a more Australian dance look would has been the routine being danced buy a male ginger in a green cricket cap.
I watched it, and what annoyed me most was how "un-elite" her performances felt. But not in the same way as Eric the Eel or Eddie the Eagle. They were at least challenging themselves physically and mentally, and that's what made people cheer for them, even though they were clearly rubbish at swimming or ski-jumping.

But this was someone who just wasn't even TRYING. It felt like there was minimal effort put in by her, at any point. Compare that to the athletes in mainstream events who train hard for years and years to get to a level where they can compete. Who chase marginal gains and examine every facet of their technique to improve. Who push their bodies to limit in the pursuit of a medal, or even to just make it to the Olympics.

What are we to make from watching a lady just mucking about, playing it for laughs, and scoring zero points? This wasn't the Olympics, this was Eurovision.
My theory is that drug testing kept all the good ones out of the Olympics.
Is she really the best break dancer in Australia though? Surely we’ve got more capable dancers that would’ve had a shot to actually perform at the same level as the competition?
In defence of Raygun:
She probably has a clinical, academic lens view of breaking which is fundamentally individual expression through dance. As she said, she wanted to use original moves and do something unique to express herself (e.g the kangaroo hopping as an Aussie). Whereas everyone else was focussing on optimising routines to get the maximum score, as opposed to merely expressing themselves through dance.
However, Raygun didn’t help herself when her moves looked like Auntie Rachael after she’s pickled her brain in Chardonnay at family Christmas or a toddler showing what they learned on Tik Tok. So basically: interesting concept, poor execution
Well next games being in the USA they can give line dancing for gold a go.
I'm just happy that Comedy is finally an Olympic sport.
It’s even more hilarious when you see the build up.
She wins the Oceania qualifier with only 15 entries. Some how wins- tbf the videos of it show everyone was just as bad.

The three girls that missed out try a general qualifier and come 37/38th and 40th out of 40 😆😆

Yer set up to fail seems pretty obvious now
This was more Chris Lilley than Chris Lilley himself. That dance and outfit was just funnier than any fictional character. 😂
Worth it for the almost instantaneous tiktok of her performance with Mr G's iconic speech over it.
So basically a dance organisation was lobbying to get ballroom dancing into the olympics, the olympics turned them down because they didn't see it being a big draw.  Breaking was accepted into the youth olympics as a compromise despite being irrelevant to the youth for 2 decades, at this point the olympics just had to give the ballroom people something.  It was fine, then France approved it for the Olympics.  15 people tried out for this.  You've heard the expression 1 in a million.  Raygun was 1 in 15.
I don’t get why people say she failed. Clearly she is in the running for bronze in the meme medals behind gold - matrix shooter and silver - Turkish assassin. 

And really for most of us non sporty types aren’t the meme medals the most important part of the olympics?
My 7 year old daughter is shocked that netball isn’t an Olympic sport but THIS is???
We like to think we are a nation of laid-back larrikins until someone does a funny breakdance routine and everyone loses their minds.
As someone with a PhD in counterterrorism, this is why I am VERY aware of the difference between theoretical/academic and real-world expertise!!
Yeah this is one of my uni lecturers. Yes she spoke about it a lot in the lead up
Is this just a big piss take by her and we aren't in on it yet?
A cautionary tale for those sports approached by the IOC.
I heard on the grape vine she was coached by Russel coight. He came out of the bush to help but the competition was pretty fierce this year...
It's 2 things for me; it's sexist and elitist. Imagine if a man was allowed to perform as terribly as she did? We wouldn't be saying good on her for having a go. No way. The way she was patting herself on the back and then tried to throw shade at those critiquing her lawn bowls tracksuit. The other thing she did was to take that opportunity away from a minority. It was never going to be a breaker from Cabramatta with a Vietnamese background. No way. They chose the 36 year old White girl and elevated her to Olympian status.
Surely most us would have done exactly the same thing she has - taken the shot to be an Olympian, turned up and do your best in a self-deprecating way? I know I would have!
I feel Raygun's performance was a commentary on the rules, judging criteria and judging for Breaking, and how fluffy they are, vs those for a sport like Rhythmic Gymnastics. 

Gymnasts have technical elements they must cross off during their performance , and are judged individually. 

B-boys &girls are judged in relation to their competitor, and do not have the same sort of technical elements they must go through.

IMHO to avoid a similar situation,  Breaking must be more explicit with what they want, be less fluffy,, and have a minimum of technical requirements that must be executed in a battle.

Edit- formatting
Smells like corruption, smells like IOC. Business as usual.
People are taking this so seriously? It’s just funny guys
I've seen better by 12 year old kids dancing in front of glass doors at Darling Harbour.
“I was never going to beat these girls on what they do best, the dynamic and the power moves,” Gunn said after her performance went viral.

“So I wanted to move differently, be artistic and creative because how many chances do you get in a lifetime to do that on an international stage?

“I was always the underdog and wanted to make my mark in a different way.”
It was an amazing cross between Luther from Umbrella Academy and Napoleon Dynamite.
i didn't know it was a sport
Eh. I'm finding it hard to give a f\*ck. How is breakdancing an Olympic sport even when it's done well? Time to create "So You Think You Can Breakdance" and watch Channel 7 make a mint.
Any train in New York has dancers hustling change that are  10000x better than that dismal display. While entertaining I think this whole thing shows a pretty blatant disrespect and disconnect to breakdancing culture, it’s kind of one of the most ignorant white privileged things I’ve ever seen
Oh god, why is Australia so embarrassing?😂 Was Scomo in charge of this?
Same kinda scenario with the FIS (ski racing organisation) taking over and running snowboarding slope style (jumps and rails). 

Most funding goes to racing instead of sharing with slope style. I think more people watch slope more than racing these days. Like usual, it’s old heads in control of the money
If they asked me to represent Australia at the Olympics in a sport I knew nothing about I’d say no.
I’m kind of pissed at the defence of her by the Olympics chief de mission. Good on Raygun if she persevered to stay in the sport, but that, in and of itself, doesn’t make you *good* at it. I sucked at swimming as a kid but finally got to be ok at some of the strokes. It doesn’t make me Olympic material.
She could have single handedly ended that event as an Olympic sport 😂
Guys, I don’t see any of you representing your country!! She had to win shit just to qualify! All this negative shit really “encourages” potential Olympians for having a go! Just fucken leave her alone!
This exact same thing happened with Snowboarding. The Olympics chose the skiing federation to do it. The qualifiers were a circus because surprise they never ran snowboarding competitions before. The best snowboarder at the time, Terje Hakenson, was very vocal about this and refused to go.

Can anyone else chime in with a third or fourth example?

It’s almost like the Olympics chooses the committee that gives them the most kickbacks. Shocker!
Should never have been allowed in as a "sport" in the first place. Embarrassing. 
TLDR:

1. Australia didn't have an established national federation for breaking when it became an Olympic sport.  
2. Gunn won her spot through a small regional competition - the WDSF Oceania Breaking Championships - where only 15 B-Girls competed.  
3. Gunn acknowledged she couldn't compete with other dancers on technical skills and aimed to make her mark differently.  
4. Breaking will not be part of the 2028 Los Angeles Olympics, and its future in the Olympics is uncertain.

Also (info from another Reddit) usually breakers can choose their own music and prepare the choreography for many months. At the Olympics it was a freestyle instead, which is hard.
Lordy, I can see Raygun becoming a new Aussie slang word. Just like ‘doing a Bradbury’ has become a thing.
My favourite comment on that article, “Hopless display from and over educated fool”
I don’t care what Anna Meares says, this Raygun woman should not have agreed to go to Paris. She obviously knew she could not compete so made a mockery of it.
That performance was clown shit.
American here. Give her an 8 episode docuseries on Netflix.

I want to understand her life and this fuck up 😆
Holy fuck. Imagine being the reason a sport was removed from the Olympics. I literally can't stop laughing at her routine.
World DanceSport Federation needs to stay out of our business.


Breaking isn't a sport or an event. It's a lifestyle.


A lifestyle that is NOT represented by some cunt that sits in an office or some cunt lecturer at a university.


'Raygun' is a national embarrassment.
Piss off ya wowser, that was the most Australian thing I have ever seen in my life, if you added a pelican eating a pigeon in the background I'd be crying green and gold patriot tears.
No need to hate the player.  She knew what she needed to do to make it to the Olympics, did it, & had a life-changing experience in Paris! Full kudos to her.

Clearly the process was terrible, but that's not her fault.
I actually watch an awesome break dancing competition at the State Library of Victoria in February and any of the competitors would have been better. I do see that she was doing an interpretive dance kind of approach and that she has a ballet background, but I am curious how the competitions would work to determine Olympic selection.
I also (many years ago) went to DMC DJ championships at the old Hi-Fi Bar. I’m would have assumed that the Olympic qualifying would have been a similar format.
I'd love to see Roy and HG commentate on her "performance"
im positive she did this just for a free European holiday - probably also withheld the fact that there was an event for selecting the olympians from the breaking community. In this economy I kind of get it...
She is a millennial. This was a last-ditch attempt for her to buy a home.
Heres a reddit question: what happens in the olympics introduces a new game and everyone participating sucks really bad at it. Obviously the game wont return, but do the judges give really low scores and still award a gold or do the just wash their hands and send everyone home?
Breakdancing isn’t a sport, absolute farce it’s entertained in the first place
To average Australians they probably feel either embarrassed or dismayed at the circumstances leading  to the travesty.

Moreover it's stab in the guts to the actual athletes that actually worked the hell for their spot/right to compete as the best in Australia in their field, which can't be said of Gunn.
Non-Australian here. The headlines on this news website are dominated by sensational and clickbait stories, and the content reads like a tabloid. I feel like reading this kind of news every day could turn me into an incel.
Just a reminder here that black Americans created this art form. The whitewashing in this article is insane. They were disadvantaged, but most importantly black kids dancing to hip hop. Why the hell are the Gees mentioned when an artist like Sugar Hill Gang and Grand Master Flash are more appropriate touch stones.
The fact that there is more outrage around this than the literal pedo that was allowed to compete says plenty.
It was not a good event, and it is not sport - at least to me.
TBH I thought it was quite funny and I reckon if any of the posters on here tried to do any of the moves they’d break their spine. 

It’s a breakdancing competition, Chill!
The only 'unAustralian' thing about this whole mess is the hate and bullying directed at an individual who gave it a shot, ...

Case of barking up the wrong tree. If you actually cared, you'd look into how sports is funded in Australia. Too much attention is given to mainstream sports, while niche sports are ignored. The problem is Australia. Compared to other countries, corporate funding of niche sports; or the reduced cost of leasing commercial property; shows how much they care about community.

The reality of the Olympics is that the vast majority of participants are self-funded amateurs that work two-three jobs to pay rent, and maybe afford to participate in required international competitions. The rest, who never got the chance to meet qualification and get a shot, are too busy try to survive the cost-of-living crisis and practice without club membership.
What amazes me is that by changing the name it has always been known as, breakDANCING, they think people will just accept its now a sport?  This is what happens when you dilute the meaning of sport to include whatever you think will make you look relevant, when to both sports enthusiasts, and real break dancers, the whole thing comes across as a total cringe.  Anyway, Im a decent juggler, so hopefully that gets a run in the Brisbane games.
I think it was a bloody disgrace and I felt embarrassed, honestly. Some mates of mine from the US were watching the break dancing and were interested in seeing Australia being represented.

They were watching when they called me to see what was being displayed too. It was a travesty and shame. I saw the people watching around the ring as well during the act, everyone was gobsmacked and with blank expressions on their faces.

I really hope some sort of inquiry is made into this because there were plenty of good dancers there and I know that Australia could have been represented better.
A whole thread of people crying. Lighten up Jesus Christ.
I think it exposes the bigger worry with all these sports; how parasocial and jingoistic people get.  Like, "Oh, we've done really well / poorly in this event!", when, no, you have done nothing, the athlete is the one performing, not the country.

I know this will never change, but from someone who doesn't really care looking in, it's one of the most bizarre experiences and must put so much unneeded pressure and expectations on the only people that actually matter; the athletes.
The real question is how TF is break dancing in the olympics.

Complete joke
So ballroom sabotaged breaking by smuggling someone in to make the sport look like a joke and get permabanned
My take on is and don't get upset by this people:

This debarcle is the end result of being a DEI hire her whole life. Not to be rude, but a PhD in break dancing? sounds woeful. 

Glad she had fun though, best of wishes on her first class back as a lecturer.
I was actually picturing it was Magda doing breaking at the Olympics the whole time.
Kath could’ve done better…and Sharon always was a good little mover
My old memory recalls a Full Frontal* skit with Jane Turner doing similar moves as an Australian rhythmic gymnast.

Edit: Link (if not auto removed) "jane turner does gymnastics"
https://youtu.be/7xlGGnsKD7M?si=tvRr8RUp3nwEV7vg

*Edit: Reddit memory has pointed out it was Fast Forward
Australian sports is not knowing if your countryman/countrywoman in a tracksuit is about to redefine the very meaning of greatness or put on a delusional performance straight out of a school sports carnival.
Pity its not in the next Olympics, how funny would it be to see Kath and Kel rock up in their tracksuits as the ultimate piss take 🤣
I have not watched any of these Olympics, and despite that, this performance is in my top three events of all time. Thanks Australia. Cynical bastids!
That fact the Australian came out like such hot shit, then started jumping around like a kangaroo had me fucking laughing. 

She deserves to be a laughing stock of the country.
Australia's Eric the Eel moment.
Yeah the only question I've got is do we adopt it and make it our own because that's who we are or do we hope it goes away it because it's kind of cringe and embarrassing?


5, 10 years ago I would have said guaranteed adoption, but we've slipped so far from our larrikin history...
I thought Chris Lilley had a new series.
No, it's summer heights high!
It seemed clearly intentional watching that event she qualified in that they weren’t trying to get real breakdancers in.
Apparently it was a worldwide thing with the IOC deciding on Breaking (over Ballroom) without consulting anyone from the community.

So they put the word out that it was a sport and pretty much threw every community into chaos to create a qualifying tournament (with the metrics) and establish an authorizing body.
Pretty sure Ray Guns boyfriend/coach "sammy the free" is also to blame for this debacle. He also break dances in the style of toddler mode. I'm sure they are both not really in the breaking scene either, but more ring in types looking to fit in, they found a loop hole and qualified for the Olympics.
That’s a great question - “How were the qualifiers advertised?” For only 15 to turn up from “Oceania”.

Perhaps only advertised within ballroom dancing circus?  *Circles
Sometimes its the people you know that gets you the job and not the skills
yeah kids even do hip hop classes and do better
It comes down to resources. How many teenage street performers can get themselves to Sydney on the off chance they might be the one person chosen to go to the Olympics. This is why the popular sports have such well resourced development programs. You can’t just magic international level competitors out of nowhere.
What I don't get is, our skateboarders and bmx freestylers come to the Olympics saying how they've been training hard and have all these new moves they've been working on just to debut at the Olympics. Why didn't she up the training regime? Why didn't she incorporate some callisthenics and upper body conditioning so she wasn't just rolling around on the floor? Why wasn't she focusing on skill acquisition? I get she's full-time a lecturer, but if you don't have time to train, why are you competing at an elite level? She didn't improve from her qualification and, if anything, was worse. Who let her just not train for this?
https://ausbreak.org/

That is their website. Partnership with DanceSport Australia (Competitive Ballroom and Latin American Dancing)
> Was it just a group of ballroom dancers who were told they had a couple of years to learn breaking?

That is who runs this, so maybe?
I've seen drunk old mate put on a better routine, at the pub, after the footy.
"Break dancing? Like the Sprinkler and the Kangaroo?"

"yeah, that'll be awesome"
I'm gonna be a French pole vaulter
This is a great idea for my Halloween costume, thanks for that!
Just modify their squid games costume from 2 years ago.
nobody gonna remember this shit by then
Doing the Kangaroo and Sprinkler dances
That's precisely the risk facing breakdancing; that the conformity that comes with optimizing for points and structure eliminates the creativity of it. See all the other artistic sports that just end up being inscrutable for outsiders and performances that effectively look the same (eg gymnastics).
That's actually pretty good.
this guy clipboards.
There is no way she does, she just didn’t have the same fitness and strength of the other competitors
It didn’t say how long for. “Three to four hours a day for the two days beforehand” there fixed it.
Why train for three hours a day when you can apparently just stop taking your seizure medication.
3-4h a day is not much in the scheme of international competitors.
She was on the ABC where she said she was doing strength training twice a week.

What an insult to the swimmers that spent their entire lives in the pool and the gym to get the shot at competing on the world stage.

There is now a lot of articles about 'keyboard warrior trolls' trying to take her down with people like Craig Foster defending her. The whole thing is a disgrace and makes Australia look like a bunch of spoilt babies who's government will just through money at in the hope of sending to the Olympics.
Most of her training was physical conditioning.  I think she was trying to build muscle to do all the cooler moves, but obviously did not get there.
Maybe she counts her research as training?
I read this 10 minutes ago. Walked away. Came back. Still laughing.
I doth my Akubra to you and shall henceforth be referring to her as the same.
spit up my drink reading this
Baz Luhrmann’s take on breakdancing culture would get my money in a heartbeat
No new steps!
Breakdancing two: Electric Kangaroo
I'd watch the hell out of it!
Tony Collette as Raygun lesssss gooooooo
Breaking 2: Olympic Boogaloo
Strictly Breaking: New Steps
Pretty similar situation to how World Skate, a rollerskating body, and their international affiliates run Olympic Skateboarding while giving nothing back to grass roots skateboarding.
Ray Gun was originally a ballroom dancer as well.
The 19 minute clip on 9now of RayGun's entire performance made me physically cringe multiple times. 

The US, French and Latvian B-girls were leagues above the Aussie competitor.
That would explain why, in the whole competition, there weren’t any black DJ’s, MC’s, judges or dancers.

For a dance form that originated in the South Bronx.
I the impression ballroom didn’t event try as they assumed it would be rejected.
The international governing body for breaking.
This is what I find so annoying now that I've learned a bit about how she qualified to get there and it got added to the Olympics.  

It seems like she capitalised on a lack of competition to take centre stage rather than supporting the community she researches by promoting the best dancers.
Her sense of entitlement and privilege is galling. Someone who is used to talking her way into anything. 
As an academic, she probably doesn’t know any.
Why weren't the "actual Australian break dancers" at the qualifying event that she won, though?
Big ballroom
Maybe the whole thing was research material.
"You can't turn yourself into a meme"
"Fucking watch me"
A+
I honestly also thought she might be doing an ethnography 😅
And it’s like no

Your performance just sucked
Yes already saw on the breakfast news how she is a victim of misogynist media now and how she is breaking new ground in dance.

This is just absolutely mental. She is now a victim.
And then wonder why people don’t take phd’s from certain fields seriously.. at all..
She's managed this experiment by exploiting her privlidge as a white middle class women to inject herself into a culture of urban brown/blackness purely to question it's hierarchy of physical /creative skill (and by extension the unforced exclusion of her cohort) formed without the foundation of white hegemony and intergenerational wealth. Something the presiding white supreamist culture simply would never allow in any other event that are all  based in this historical structure of financial and racial apartheid.

In other words, she's gonna get herself a doctorate of Karen.
It's the art PHD approach. 

If you haven't got it, write until you can explain why you actually do.
Better call Raygun?
This! Hahaha, came here just to say this.
Breaking bad, but so bad it's good. It's gold!
Raygun what a perfect name!
She's my olympic revelation. What a champ!
Bad Breaking
A lot of sports seem to reserve spots from certain regions. The climbing competition had a climber from South Africa for both the mens and women's, that the commentator said qualified through the African qualifier, and honestly they were pretty bad, the man in particular scored the worst and could barely get into the bouldering routes. But no one talks about that because it's fairly boring watching someone fail to climb Vs watching someone dance badly.
Australia wasn't. Oceania was. Because they'd like  regions to be represented. It would seem unfair if there wasn't one nation from each nation reprsentatively.

Since we tend to be the better nation in the region it effectively means Australia was going to get such an available spot.
I think it wouldnt have been cringe if she was good.
It's grown on me
A sinilar thing happened with snowboarding events in the 90s. I'd probably argue snowboarding is better for it now but that's still a contentious view. 
Its happening with Tennis and pickleball in a similar way
Isn't parkour kinda coming in with the revamp to the modern pentathlon? They are replacing horse jumping with a human obstacle course next Olympics.
My 5 year old showing me a rad new dance move
I know, I was holding my breath waiting for the “it’s woke” reference and nearly passed out.
When having a go goes wrong
The Olympic officials are in full damage control. The fact that a younger competitor was not able to be identified here in Australia reflects the lack of an adequate process around the qualification process as well as a lack of leadership amongst those who were tasked with the decision making. Did they not know how or where to find suitable breakdancers?
Hey, we all celebrate that one black athlete from a poor country that defies the odds and still comes way last at the marathon. This is the same except it's a rich white person trying to compete in a sport that was founded by poor people.
This isn't the first time someone has slipped into the Olympics

https://www.spiveyblog.com/posts/the-curious-case-of-the-harvard-graduate-who-faked-her-way-into-the-olympics
This! Like wtf? There are absolutely more talented dancers who should have had the opportunity before this woman. Her routine was so bad I genuinely believe I could recreate it given a few hours to practice and a couple of vodka sodas. I have no dance training whatsoever, in any style. That should not be where the bar is for the freaking Olympics! I’m actually in disbelief
Omg that’s so bad, but from her perspective how do you not cotton on that you aren’t the best person for the job here. She studies the dance form and surely knows who is the best in the country presumably
> It explains much. I'm starting to feel a bit sorry for her.

Also from Raygun:

> “So we’d better make sure that we’re not being misrepresented. People were really worried about what happened in the ’80s, where the narrative kind of got carried away from what breaking was, and a lot of the culture and the history was lost. 

Do we think Raygun has represented the breaking culture? Advanced it? Or made a mockery of it?
I feel sorry for the backlash she seems to be getting, but if Australia has no entrant for say, shotput or something - I'd happily represent my country and make a dick of myself on the world stage throwing it about 3 metres with a huge smile on my face. That's some Rémi level trolling right there and I'm all for it
Sounds like material for a sequel to Strictly Ballroom
lol. People were getting so mad yesterday when this was pointed out to them!
I felt sorry for her the moment I saw all the articles popping up. Why don’t people realise or care before commenting that there is a person they’re talking about, who will be affected by those comments. Sure, the sport and selection process deserves criticism but there was a person, who however they got there, was doing their best?
Breakdancing isn't on the schedule for 2028, or beyond.
The decision to nominate athletes isn't a centralised decision, except with large 'mainstream' sporting associations like Swimming, Track and Field, etc.   
  
Heck 77% of athletes are self-funded and of those, most participate because they meet the qualification requirements of ranking in recognised international competitions doing what they love. 

The original point of the Olympics is to distance countries from politics and to get together in friendly competitive fun
The fact that you can get a PhD in fucking breakdancing is undermining real PhD’s.
“Gentlemen, this is breakdancing manifest!”
Yep- she wasn’t even old enough to remember any hip hop or break dancing back in the day.

This wasn’t it .
36 is middle aged? Reddit is brutal.
I wouldn’t call dance a bullshit sport.

If you’ve ever done it at competitive level, you’ll know how hard the training is.

This was just dumb - so many kids who can break would have loved the opportunity.
Agree. Very main character vibes
And will now even have more material to be able to use to put together more academic papers and speak at meetings. None of this will help the kids who are actually out there doing breakdancing
Agree - the audacity to represent your country and your sport with that kind of unwaivering confidence is borderline delusional
Not really fair to say its a bullshit sport... When its almost equivalent to gymnastics floor routine. Unless you think that shouldn't be in the olympics too.
> a bullshit sport. 

Why is it bullshit?
Searched the whole thread looking for this comment.
Let's start with race walking 
She supposedly spends 3-4 hours a day training. Surely in that time she should have picked up some of the dynamic technical elements and be able to execute them in a passable way. 

Surely it doesn't take 3-4 hours to master the lawn sprinkler and kangaroo???
She effectively said she didnt have the skill to compete with the others and so just ran her own interpretation. 

Its like somehow qualifying for the cycling, and deciding to show up with a fisher price tricycle.
If, as is claimed, you realise you’re not up to competition standard, shouldn’t you still at least try to achieve to the best of your ability?

This stunt was, at least partly, taxpayer funded…
Bwahaha you could be onto something
If you watch the final that qualified her for the Olympics the other finalist was not really that good. She did legit tricks but lacked creativity and flair and was quite dull. I propose Raygun is the best female breakdancer in Oceania. The opponent was a real breakdancer. But that's the problem as she did the real stuff ... not that well. It would have looked silly to pick her too. There was no great choice. I don't think there was some hidden talent somewhere who was overlooked like some movie princess.
I hope so! I want to see some Singaporean aunties whoop the competition and bring home gold.
You forgot the pole vaulter, he definitely deserves a meme medal.
You need 75 countries with national sporting bodies to get up
Australians are a pack of cunts
please spill the tea, the international community needs to hear from you
She sucks ass
Sending her there was a partly taxpayer funded exercise, that doesn’t sit too well…
>  Breaking must be more explicit with what they want, be less fluffy,, and have a minimum of technical requirements that must be executed in a battle.


Nah, no thanks.


We don't need regulations, rules or governing bodies.


Breaking isn't a sport.


We have one rule in n out circles: NO BITING!
> performance was a commentary

agree, full [k strass](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dj9VF7LyffU&t=98s) vibes

[anyone who doesn't know, k strass is a "yoyo master" persona invented to troll the shit out of daytime news shows in USA]
Seriously people should put this energy literally anywhere else this isn’t a real problem
No one did, and still no one does
She did know something about break dancing though, which makes it worse….
The internet rage bandwagon is a rollin.
It was only ever going to be a one off for Paris. 
The scheduled sports for LA were settled ages ago.
100% agreed

except i reckon she was trolling.

she even wrote an article last year criticising the olmpics for 'sportifying' breaking. getting serious troll vibes here
The problem is that breakdancing was put into the games at all. 

Breakdancing isn’t a sport. It has never tried to get into the games. 

Dance sport has. For decades. And the Paris organisers went ‘we want to get ‘the youth’ so we’ll have breakdancing’

But breakdancing literally is not a sport.  It isn’t scored. It has no competitions. No Centeral body. It has none of what is required to a tually be at the Olympics. So dance sport tried to help. 

The issue isn’t ballroom getting involved. The issue is the sport was out in at all. 


As someone who’s part of a sport that has to battle every Olympics to be included (softball/baseball) the fact a ‘sport’ was included here that literally had to be set up to even BE a sport is a joke.
One could argue that someone with a literal PhD in cultural studies who lectures about the breakdancing culture in Sydney might have a vague clue about other b-girls, many of whom would be more talented than herself. She could have and should have stepped aside. This was driven by ego and it's backfired on her massively.
Some things can be a sport but not an *Olympic* sport. Olympics requires highly quantifiable technical skills. Some other sports rely on artistic skills and the vibe and other non-quantifiable things that mean they exist much more in the moment. I kind of think breaking \*shouldn't\* be an Olympic sport because from what I've seen (which I agree isn't that much beyond Youtube vids) there's a lot more to it than just the moves they do, like charisma, the relationship between the dancers, the atmosphere from the crowd, and that stuff can't be quantified and stuffed into a neat Olympic package. (Maybe that's what Raygun was trying to tell us??) I kind of think making it Olympic sport would kill a lot of the stuff that makes breaking fun to do and watch. Like you slip, but you recover well and make it look cooler somehow? The crowd thinks it's awesome, but the Olympic judges would only care you didn't do the move correctly. I don't think there's a rule of cool in Olympic level events.
I’m sorry this thought of ‘she gave it a go’ Nonshe didn’t. I’ve had friends have a few drinks last night and are able to do what she did. (They’ve posted the videos) 

She claims she trains 3-4 hours a day. Bullshit. 

She isn’t good. She didn’t try. And she very easily could have informed actually talented B-girls about qualifications. 

Instead we had a middle aged white Australian woman represent us on the world stage in a sport invented by Black and Hispanic Americans that is a sub culture amongst POC around the world. 

It is thw most blatant example of white privlidge I’ve seen in a very long time.
>  Anyway, Im a decent juggler

"sounds a lot like Ballroom"

\- *World DanceSport Federation*
>that by changing the name it has always been known as, breakDANCING,

Lol what? Ive heard it called breaking for at least a decade, that name has nothing to do with the Olympics.

Edit: It was known as breaking *before* it was ever called breakdancing 

https://www.redbull.com/gb-en/is-it-breakdance-or-breaking
Well you’re going to have to plan out some decent Australian themed moves to maintain our status in Jugging
Sport: an activity involving physical exertion and skill in which an individual or team competes against another or others for entertainment.

Yeah, it's a sport.
In all honesty, that would have been better
...with Roy & HG "commentating"
Id rather watch that over the shit show that happened.
I thought it looked like a Celeste Barber parody
This is exactly where my mind went when I saw this!! Magda all over
Is the joke on us? Did she deliberately channel Kath?
Beralina Stumpy! Although her more contemporary performances as Margaret Bland should not be overlooked.



Edit I’m just going to go ahead and let you know this is pure raunch sauce, so at your own discretion.

https://youtu.be/aElG1Mqncp0?si=tSr7pdY4dKpwcuE3
I had not seen this before.   And today I am richer for the experience.
Fast forward Berilina Stumpy
Aw mate, you couldn't be more wrong! That was exactly as serious a performance as that event deserves!

Yo, all the flyest B-Boys and B-Girls are repping their C-ountries in Paris, cuzz! Bringing the dopest flow from the mean streets of, what, Helsinki?

Like, the Olympic judges had fucking 90s bucket hats on. And people are worried she brought the noble sport of Breaking into disrepute?
What a wild thing to say
A laughing stock for being utterly let down but having the balls to show up on the world stage knowing she was doomed and giving it a go anyway?  
Sorry she went out to represent Aus and gets nothing but respect and sympathy from me for the completely unnecessary abuse.  
The lack of compassion and humanity around the Olympic athletes this year is truly fucking grim.
Maybe the point was to entertain you, which it sounds like it did. It has been talked about and brought the sport into everyones attention.
Not laughing stock...legend. This is how Aussies used to be. Take the piss..exactly what the shit event deserved.
[deleted]
But why?
What made you say that? Genuinely curious
Actually the authorising body recognised for breaking by the IOC is the WDSF - the ballroom dancers authority. Due to ballroom being a worldwide sport they have a ton of chapters worldwide.
Ballroom in the Olympics would be insufferable. This was worth it.
He is terrible [Video evidence](https://youtu.be/zAnHWtofnOk?si=qDYmxL-WA2I2x_Py&t=160). Neither of them have the athleticism required to be good.
“Toddler mode” 😂
Is there even a national breaking scene in Australia?
This is what I've been thinking too
I also agree that they must of exploited a loop hole. And just strapping on my tin foil hat for moment.... There has to be evidence of this somewhere. I'm trying to dig down and all I can see is shes an academic with a background in ballroom dancing, similar to the overseeing committee, WDSF.
Free taxpayer funded holiday to Paris.
Were the ballroom dancers trying to make a joke of breakdancing because ballroom wasnt added as an olympic sport? (Tin hat theory)
You’ve literally just said what the commenter above you said?
Or square dancing circles
That also applies to Rhodes Scholars ...
Yep my 9yo daughter competes in hip hop dance competitions and the skill level is well beyond raygun
Well Raygun got the hop part right 🦘
No it doesnt because while many kisd would fail at that there is no way it would be so bad that this person would be the best they could find, in fact I would venture to guess there are 15 people right in Sidney right now that could do better and would only need a single taxi ride to get there.

This is more likely a case of the competition being EXTREMELY poorly advertises possibly on purpose. Wouldnt even surprise me given what we know about raygun if she was an influential person in the organization of the event.
Sydney isn't so small though (in size or as a fraction of the country). A Sydney-only competition in most areas could have more than 15 competitors.
Because she can't dance lol
Wow, you’re really going to be stretching the acting muscles there to fool everyone
You VASTLY underestimate the extremes people will go to be the edgy/funny costume. Also, it’s in like 2 months lol
And both of these comments are why breaking doesn’t belong in the Olympics in the first place
Or skills. Or experience.
Maybe, just maybe, she’s just really bad when it comes to body/motion skills. I’m sure you know or you’ve known someone that has really bad motor skills and whatever they do, it just looks wrong or goofy.
>It didn’t say how long for. “Three to four hours a day for the two days beforehand” there fixed it.

I saw an interview with her before the Olympics and she said her husband got her into breaking dancing at age 20. She's been break dancing for 16 years.
And now representing Australia - "C-Zure"!!!
I know many people that exercise 2 hours a day in addition to a normal 9-5 job. 3-4h is nothing for elite athletes.
> There is now a lot of articles about 'keyboard warrior trolls' trying to take her down with people like Craig Foster defending her.

This is the sad thing.  People are just here discussing it because we are all confused as to how and why?  If the media weren’t writing stories about her, most people wouldn’t be discussing it. 

The fact that they are playing the victim and crying misogyny only makes it more embarrassing.  It is the epitome of self absorbed white privilege arts majors that have built themself a little dance empire, surrounded themselves with sycophants and exiled or gatekept anyone who didn’t play their bullshit games.
Watch The Get Down - his take on the early days of hip hop and breaking
Similar issues with snowboarding too when first included in the Olympics they thought it'd be good to have the people that run the ski competition run it. A lot of the best snowboarders protested and never competed.
At least for the most part those involved in “grass roots” skateboarding want nothing to do with whatever comes from it being included in the Olympics
It shows. 
They were definitely better but still a huge gap between that and what I've seen from street performers. There was very little athleticism on display that was worthy of the Olympics.
>The US, French and Latvian B-girls were leagues above the Aussie competitor.

A bunch of the other competitors were literally former world champions, so it's not surprising.
Have seen some incredible break dancing in Darling Harbour, Sydney, by the old Convention Centre.  Always a diverse group dancing.

I know that inspired a planned area, but I haven’t been there lately so don’t know if that has taken off.
Ballroom was tried but was seen as old fashioned, so its governing body declared it now represented breaking.
Ballroom has been trying to get into the Olympics for decades.
She was literally on the organizing body for the qualifying event. That she won. It’s wild. This was def not satire.
Pretty selfish of her to not choose someone else most likely will use the hate she gets from here to pump out her next research paper
And we've got breakers across Australia dancing in garages and parks. As soon as I saw it, the whole scenario stunk. Feel for kids that out there pumping short vids on insta etc wishing the could get legit. Olympic committees are starting to look like FIFA directors.
Barry: Where do you think we'd be if everyone went around making up their own steps?

Scott: Out of a job.
NGL, I’d heard the joke “obviously a white woman in the arts” a few times. I thought everyone was just having a piss at her. 

I actually had no idea she was an actual researcher with a PhD in cultural studies. 

She’s actually got peer reviewed studies out too. If my uni has access, I’m going to have a look at her stuff. Not because I think she’s good, I’m just morbidly curious now. 

Depending on how studies read I might suddenly feel a lot better about my chances in postgrad. 🤣
I have think you’ve nailed it. knowing she was outclassed, she did something different to get attention instead. well, if that was her goal then she succeeded.
Autoethnographical jazz hands and a tracksuit: my expose of the “Olympics”, gendered violence and exclusivity in dancing circles - Raygun PhD.
> She is now a victim.

Well, there has been some pretty horrible things said about her online, so I would certainly say that's the case in those situations. She is not a victim if only critically analysing her dance routine alone.
People are saying absolutely vile shit about her online based on pure assumption, so yes, I’d say she is a victim. No matter what your opinion is of her performance, that doesn’t entitle you to go into public spaces and say nasty, hateful shit about her.
Honestly, it pains me that this soaks up academic space, positions and money that could be used on actual science
She is already a PhD
Lol you never heard of the beastie boys?
Better not
The girl was dreadful and I felt so sorry for her. Got 4 pts when next lowest was 65
Each continent gets at least one person for each event. So sometimes you get relatively bad athletes if a sport is not popular in a continent. Like I wouldn’t be surprised if there are few African or South Americans athlete are involved in high level badminton or table tennis or whatever.
There is a lot of subjective stuff with reserving space for oceania. Some sports only allow australia to qualify at international qualification events and not at regional qualifiers (and New Zealand is allowed to compete at regionals lol) but some sports are permitted for the regional qualifiers. It’s a little odd honestly
I think it makes it better. Her moves are gonna be the ones getting repeated on tiktok. Not the winners.
Olympic ninja warrior? Fuck yes
I Try My Hand At Breaking As A Female Academic! You Won't Believe What Happens Next! 😱
This is the real problem.

I don't actually think there's anything inherently wrong with the inclusion of breaking (ive seen a lot of people make the argument "it's not a sport", but if figure skating wasn't in the Olympics and someone proposed adding it today, someone would say the same crap).  Mind you, I'm not taking a stance on whether or not the inclusion in the Olympics is actually good for the sport/art form.  That seems contentious and I'm not educated enough to have an informed opinion.

But what *is* clear is that if you're going to include it, you should make some effort to actually find the people worthy of competing.  The fact this happened clearly shows that that simply did not happen.  Which is unacceptable as that should he the BARE MINIMUM
I still remember Eric the Eel somehow not drowning back in 2000 and we celebrated the story of him getting to the international stage.

The difference here is that there are actual, capable breakdancers in Australia that didn't get this opportunity and Raygun has taken the piss with this ridiculous performance.
I mean, that's because people that face up to adversity are viewed as heroes. 

Eric the Eel had to learn to swim in a river. That Javelin guy from Kenya, he learnt from youtube. JAMACA HAS A BOBSLIEGH TEAM. Zhiying Zeng, retraining during covid and competing at 58. And basically any Ukrainian right now. And what about Eddie the Eagle?

Legends. Success not required. Although the Javelin guy has the 7th best throw of all time.

.... 

Is she struggling, because she suffered some personal adversity? Was there no culture in the country for it? 

Nah this is just someone getting through a dodge entry process. Not a fan of the hate directed at her, but, there's no underdog story here.
No it's not the same thing. 

It's less Eric the Eel and more the Somali runner who was the president's niece. 

Her background in ballroom and the outspoken criticism of the international ballroom committee taking over the process for Breaking selection SCREAMS corruption. It appears that IBC has purposely pushed through its own people and excluded other more talented people (most likely POC from "undignified communities")
Yeah there’s a fairly high level of delusion here from her that no one’s really pointing at. She studies the dance, how could she not be aware of her skill level?
She knew she was going to be bad but I doubt she expected to get lampooned this hard for it. Because bad competitors going to the games as representatives is part of the fucking tradition as seen across nearly every sport. Her dancing and outfit just had the unfortunate addition of humorous spectacle.
Read down to the bottom of the article. Australia had no national breaking organisation so the WDSF organised the first WDSF Oceania Breaking Championships in October 2023. Gunn won the B-Girls’ category. Apparently, she really is the best we've got.
Made a mockery of it. And it’s not her culture it’s something she is researching. Badly it seems by what she put forward
I saw someone on here say something like “don’t be mad at a duck who can’t play chess, be mad at the people who put the duck in front of the chess board”
Most sports at the Olympics have a qualifying requirement.  You have to meet a minimum standard to compete and not just be the best person who showed up at a national qualifier.  For example to qualify for your country in the 100m men's butterfly you had to have a sub 52 second time.  For break dancing they should have set a minimum score that had to be beaten to qualify to stop the event becoming a joke.
100%. I’m so confused by the outrage - she saw an opportunity and she went for it. Were the moves cringey? Yes, but she absolutely knew it and leant into it. If she was a middle aged bloke I honestly wonder if we’d have seen more support for him 
Same here.
Rémi,what a guy!
I was just thinking that this is the Baz Luhrmann film we all need 😂
That is taking the onus away from her way too much. She knew she wasn't skilled enough to compete she's literally a researcher on the topic, there is no way she didn't realise she wasn't world class.
She's an academic in the field and presumably knows and has interviewed many talented dancers. But instead of using her connections and priviledge to help some kid with the skill to actually compete, she decided to make a mockery of herself and the sport on a world stage. It's difficult for me to have that much empathy for her
Good. My eyes tried to crawl out of my face watching that.
Wow, I didn't actually know that and I wish they made more of a deal about it. The way the Olympics workup media reporting goes it seems it is all centrally managed by AIS or some other body.
Well, the Olympics has definitely failed in that last bit, lol.
You can't get a PhD in break dancing
She gets to be called Dr. What a joke. 
"what is the crime?"
Just watch Run DMC vs Jason Nevins and copy them! That's it! Done. Gold! God. If you haven't checked out the article, do so. The picture they have of her head which makes it look like she's doing a head stand is one of the greatest pieces of visual propaganda you'll ever see.

OMG. Every time I comment, I laugh.
It's relatively close in the context of Gunn. The average life expectancy of a woman born in 1987 is only 79 years, while it's 72 for males.
Having confidence is fine, but being aware where you sit with the skill that you have in that sport must be also considered. I play basketball and if no one represented Australia in that sport I wouldn't be putting my hand up to play for Australia.  I'm fully aware that I'm not amazing at it and wouldn't think I should be competing at it on the worlds stage. Am I confident when I play basketball, sure, but thats only part of the full picture.
Agreed. What I'm not enjoying about all of this is the reaction to this 'not being a sport'. While I'm not a massive fan of its inclusion there are other judged events that have just as much physical demands and technical requirements that people have no problem being an Olympic sport. Why can't this also be?
That's a damn good point - what was the performance expectation from the 'sporting body' that governs breakdancing? Most associations have KPIs around comeptition results that influence funding in subsequent years. Surely this debacle hasn't helped with any of that either...
He was in 3rd pushed down to 4th. Missed 3rd by an inch.
She won the qualifier.  Are you saying she should've stepped aside for the person she beat? Who she was better than?

And why is this all on her?  Why didn't the breakdancing community set up an association?  They knew it was going to be an Olympic sport - so why didn't they enter?

And what about the male athletes?  Our male entrant, who was clearly very good, qualified via the exact same process. Why isn't anyone asking why he wasn't running around promoting this to the female dancers in his circle?

Clearly the process was hugely problematic. But Raygun deserves none of the blowback.  She made it to the Olympics, had a blast, & is being celebrated as an "Eddy the Eagle" style underdog.  Good on her.
>many of whom would be more talented than herself. 

Whom? I'm sure their must be better breakers in Australia, but people keep saying this without naming them, and it's starting to make me wonder if our breaking scene is just too small to have a world class female breaker?
She does have a clue. It's that they almost entirely don't exist mate. It's kind of a major theme in her work...

Like seriously think a fucking bit next time. Gurantee the few women in her meetups aren't better.
Agreed. It’s arguably more a sport than any of the purely skills-based events, as it at least requires exertion; but scoring on technical skills is no bueno. I’d also point to the embarrassing, lifeless, and mandatory hand-waving flourishes in the women’s Artistic Gymnastics events as a predictor of how the performative aspect would potentially be separated from the difficulty/execution elements in future games.
This. White privilege and massive entitlement. She gamed the system and had the solidarity of fellow Whites that elevated her to Olympian status. 
Jugging? Sounds like our after sport activities tbh
She's have the stadium in stitches for the right reasons.
Aunty Magz woulda smashed it
Roy: *Spinny date, spinny date*

HG: *Hello boys*

Together: *Battered sav!*
YUSSSSS👆🏼👆🏼👆🏼👆🏼
> most actual breakdancers probably don't give a fuck about it.

Especially as it has such heavy roots in radical and counter-culture movements, anyone shocked that they didn't get any respondents are the exact same folks who organized RATM on the radio and asked them not to swear in their song about fighting back against the powers that be - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PXB69XzOy7s

Capitalist drones that want to cash in on an aesthetic without understanding any of the actual culture or history behind it.
I notice that with snowboarding in the winter Olympics. A lot of the worlds best are not competing. Combination of drug use and also the fact that a lot of snowboarders are anti competitions.
I thought the b-boys finalists I saw were fairly good.
Are you assuming most breakers are drug addicts?
Because the international ballroom league of dancers couldn't get attention because their style is too dated so they subverted the breakdancing competion to get their performers international attention.  Its the first half of the linked article
This sounds worse for organization.
Omg it's like when Christian pop music tries to go mainstream 
Jesus...
This explains a lot
There is, Destructive Steps is our national competition and it's coming up in September. But I wouldn't call it large or well-known. When I went last there probably wasn't more than 1000 people in the crowd.
The World Dance group kinda wants breakdancing to be a success as they want Ballroom dancing to be an event and are trying to use breakdancing as an entry point
Barry: Where do you think we'd be if everyone went around making up their own steps?

Scott: Out of a job.
Probably a foot-in-the-door ploy for the inclusion of ballroom in subsequent games
[removed]
It's terrible she killed it for kids who are good at the art.
Advertising also takes resources. Most sports have comprehensive networks of clubs that have been built over decades. Do we even have competitive breakdancing clubs in Australia. The big sports send out talent scouts to identify high potential talent early.

Whatever you think of Raygun, she has dedicated her career to female breaking as both an academic and a participant. I don’t think she is trying to undermine the entire sport for her own glory.
The international qualifying event only had 40 female competitors worldwide.
Were all the people they competed against trained at the same dance school or something?  It really seems like some gatekeeping or favouritism has happened somewhere in along the line.  Are they part of a Hillsong group maybe?  A cabal of dance studios that only allow members to compete?  Something stinks about the whole thing.
It ain't easy, being seizey.
I have epilepsy and watching her perform was my first thought that I'd do better with one of my seizures than her :D
bgirls don’t typically show as many athletic power moves as bboys that’s probably where your disconnect is coming from. they were still great tho imo they had good musicality
I assume you’re referring to Dancer’s Alley by the ICC. Place is usually occupied by dancers of all forms,  no matter the time of week. It’s great
I'm still so baffled at this choice. Ballroom dancing is old but it's consistently popular and there are already many established competitions in ballroom dancing. Meanwhile, breakdancing had its peak in pop culture two decades ago.
The thing is, Ballroom is still surprisingly popular. My 9 year old does it, and his class is full, as is the teen class. I was genuinely surprised at how popular it was when we first took him.
No doubt her husband was too yeh?
Abstract from "Where the #bgirls at? politics of (in)visibility in breaking culture"

>Representation is a central tenet of hip-hop culture, yet women’s experiences and contributions have long been invisibilised. This article reveals some of the barriers to visibility facing women in breaking (“b-girls”). It shows how b-girls respond to gender-based challenges and their sense of obligation to be visible in order to promote gender equality. Through participant-observation, interviews with Sydney b-girls, and online case studies, this article situates b-girling practices “in relation to” a hip-hop feminist framework. This article shows how white hetero-patriarchal neoliberal structures shape visibility in breaking culture, and how b-girls respond to, negotiate, challenge, and enact their representation.

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14680777.2021.1890182

After reading that, I think we need to be more targeted with university funding.
Good luck to you in your studies There are a lot of smart idiots out there. Don’t let them intimidate you.  
It doesn't appear to be satire. 

There're clips of her competing at other competitions, that are just as bafflingly bad.
At the expense of more talented breakdancers. She should be fined for taking the piss
Couldn’t she have faked a headache? Memes are forever.
It was pretty telling when J Attack also wore the Australian team tracksuit and no one mocked him for that.
Last I checked in Australia your social sciences and humanities get like 5% of government mental research funding.
Except history, culture and sociology are all -incredibly- important fields and pretending that they take something away from "real" sciences is goofy af. That kind of belief and attitude are why ethics boards have to be literally forced upon engineers and the like, everyone convinced they can solve the worlds problems while ignoring the worlds humanity.

Folks like you will spout this kind of nonsense, but then turn around and happily consume and take part in all the artistic works and culture that folks with culture studies degrees and phd's enable, it's honestly embarrassing that you claim to be an academic, but push such a massive amount of anti-intellectualism.
Something like bobsled in Jamaica.
Is it related to how the individual sport’s governing body has placed Australia regionally? I.e., in soccer Aus is part of the Asian Footbqll Confederation and must qualify for an Asia spot, not Oceania
> Some sports only allow australia to qualify at international qualification events and not at regional qualifiers (and New Zealand is allowed to compete at regionals lol) but some sports are permitted for the regional qualifiers.

No sport restricts Australia from qualifying through Oceania regional qualifiers. 

If a country has already qualified athletes through world championships or world rankings and have exceed the per nation athlete limit, then they are no longer able to qualify extra athletes through their respective regional qualifiers.
She was.  Didn't her interview basically say,'I knew I couldn't win on skill, so I made up all original moves'
Maybe she just did it because she saw that she had an opportunity to do the funniest thing ever.
For a lot of people, being allowed to compete at the Olympic Games is a huge achievement. So even if a person knows that they don't have any hope of winning, but do have the skills to qualify, then that's still a big win for them. (Although probably they'd prefer not to be mocked for it.)

In this case, a lot of people are saying that other more skilled people should have got in instead - and that's probably true. But that isn't the fault of this competitor. It's not her fault that more skilled people didn't qualify. If higher skill people missed out, then the qualification process is at fault - not her.
I think there’s a lot more nuance to it than her being the best we have.  Breaking is not a sport with a lot of money behind it.  If breakers had to find their own way to the trials I can absolutely see that many amazing breakers would not have the funds to attend.  Breakers tend to be on the young side so not high earners.  The fact that she is a 36 year old professor says a lot about how the sport is funded
I suspect it’s more that none of the legitimate breakers in Australia wanted to (or even knew to) attend a competition run by the ballroom dancing federation
Yeah I got that, but surely she was aware of the talent that exists in the sub culture right? How would that sit okay with her is what I’m asking
Where were the championships advertised?
Did you watch the latest red bull dance your style comp. In each country. Then the world come. WAY better. This was a farce
Go watch the finals on YouTube, it's honestly baffling how she won it as some of the people she was competing against actually had moves and could use the beat. 

I'm guessing the judges were ballroom dancing people who had no idea about anything.
 🤣 she is absolutely not the best we have, are you taking the piss? I thought this was funny at first but can you imagine how all the actually good bgirls feel. This whole thing was piss take and  if this was any other sport Australians would be pissed 😡
I watched a couple of those championship videos. From what I can tell, the scoring seems to incentivise fitting as many different moves as possible. Whatever 'style' they have doesn't seem to matter. No matter how janky looking. She's probably a lot better than we laypeople realise and probably actually is the best we have. It was probably just unfortunate Oceania was so weak making her look so much worse than everyone. Also, people are only sharing her lowlights and weird looking transitions.  Breaking is pretty ridiculous looking and you could probably edit anyone's routine to make them look almost as silly.  All in all, breaking in its sport form is kind of ridiculous and shouldn't be in the Olympics. 
If she was a middle aged man the internet would be going "lol he's such a dad!"
Should’ve sent the guy from the old Carlton Draught flash dance ad
With a pot belly and we'd be going ham for him! 

But Raygunn also seemed low-key cocky on stage which was also bizarre to see
my current theory is its an elaborate troll

she's literally published articles criticising the olympics for making breakdancing inauthentic, and on dance as a form of protest.

(or i'm just in denial)
It’s so interesting the contrasting opinion between r/australia and r/hiphopheads - https://www.reddit.com/r/hiphopheads/s/4xy4KZMeZW - they seem to be so happy that it’s an event in the Olympics
You can just not watch events you don't enjoy
Government agencies are responsible for administrative processes, providing public advice on the state of sports in Australia, and distribution of its limited funding. 

... it's mostly arms length from the associations that are responsible for the level of competition, which is needed for qualification requirements. The associations are mostly membership and privately funded, supplemented with what public funding they do manage to be granted.

Frankly, Aussies (and media) overstate the role of government in many parts of society. We're a liberal democracy, not authoritarian.
I think a lot of the perception is because the high profile events and most of the medals Australia won actually did involve a lot of government funding and management
Yah agree with you - I meant confidence in repping your sport in its debut at the Olympics, the highest stage, where you not only represent ur country and sport but, in her own words, the culture of breaking. 

I honestly think she’s put the sport back 10 years because of her attitude and I think she did it selfishly to call herself and Olympian.
Nah. She's studied this form of dance to the point of a PhD. You cannot tell me that she doesn't have the names of other girls she studied that she could have clued in to the qualifying process and put before herself? I doubt they had any idea it was happening until little miss main character here decided Lay Down Sally's title of most embarrassing olympian was going to be hers now.
The breakdancing community weren't allowed to set anything up, as the article pointed out. This was run by the Australian branch of ballroom dancing.

I'm also gonna go out on a limb and assume that not too many top break dancers have the cash to splash around on a trip to Sydney to the qualifiers, or the interest in doing so when their sport has quite literally been hijacked as a wedge strategy to get ballroom dancing into the Olympics.

I sort of imagine that break dancing has the kind of culture that would give that the middle finger for starters.
She is not innocent
Yes, the freestyle dance scene in Australia is *tiny* compared to the entire dance scene. Choreography is incredibly popular in Australia. From that, a very small percentage make up the breaking community (probably <5%).

Other countries like the US, France, Japan, and South Korea have large and very strong freestyle dance communities and Asian countries have a big breaking culture.

Its simply not something that's common in Australia.
Well, there's Molly, the woman who was somehow only runner-up in the qualifier, for one thing. 

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MorhA98eK7M](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MorhA98eK7M)
*Seriously*, Roy & HG as Australia’s **official breakdancing commentary team** is now my goal.
Flat bag!
Is breakdancing in 2024 really a pure anti-establishment art form? (No)

There'd be extremely talented dancers out there who would jump at the chance to go to the Olympics. Seen way better routines on Xfactor
Snowboarding is also similar because originally the ski guys hated them but after some years the FIS used their power and connections to make it an olympic event because it was trendy and skiing wasn't anymore.

But it's a different culture and like cycling would represent skateboarding - ironically they have a similar history with BMX.
who chose not to compete? all the big names at the olympics are the same who show up at Xgames. obv if you dont compete at all you wouldnt go to either of those. keep in mind the number of athletes per country is capped. Canada and the US cant just send everyone
Didn’t this woman have a PHD in breakdancing or some shit?

I feel like it’s crazy that someone like that basically happily and enthusiastically destroyed global opinions of women breakdancers
I was thinking more along the lines of the anti-drug messages done to rap I got in high school from otherwise unemployed actors.
 “Can’t you tell you’re not making Christianity any better, you’re just making Rock & Roll worse!”
So I just looked at Destructive Steps YouTube account, turns out Raygun won last year https://youtu.be/0WmYG2_npyc?si=5eXH-qkKhKbMWc-j

This narrative that she is not part of the community and not recognised by other breakers seems to be total BS.
That sounds like about as many as I saw at the olympics and they are probably more into it.
You certainly don't increase your odds of more dances being added by torpedoing trial dances in the Olympics. 

Though admittedly, I've heard more illogical plans and complaints so it's not impossible the organisation or members of the organisation are behaving irrationally.
Possibly because it was run by the ballroom dancing club?   
The breakdancing club wasn’t invited and didn’t want to.
Have been helping my Mum interstate for a while now., will add that to the list of things to enjoy when I return home.  Thank you!
Yes I like this view. Makes me feel much younger and it’s the 1980s again. Only 20 years ago.
And as Paris has highlighted, it would be much easier to incorporate a sport that already has international competitions.
>yet women’s experiences and contributions have long been invisibilised

I have a feeling this individual has never explored hip hop and sees it as a male-dominated space, therefore this statement must be true. 

I hate how academics just load this language in with no evidence because it’s believable. Maybe it is, maybe it isn’t; but it’s a claim you shouldn’t make in an academic paper with no evidence. 

Women have had presence in hip hop for a LONG time. Naturally there are going to be less if women are less interested on average in hip hop.
Exactly, there are levels to this...and it appears she performed exactly to her mediocre level on a global stage. If I was a breakdancer, I'd legit hate this person for making the sport look bad.
but at the level where everyone is bad so she wasn't embarrassing
What was there left to say? It's the same terrible outfit, she just showed up in it first. Of course there's not going to be the exact same reaction. That's like saying "I told you the same joke twice, why aren't you laughing as hard as the first time?"


At least he could actually breakdance.
I’m not entirely sure. For some sports I know the IOC also has a hand with who qualifies where, but soccer is an outlier with australia in the Asian confederation but some sports we don’t get any regional Olympic qualification because the IOC says so. We just have to qualify through the primary qualifiers
At the cost of a legitimate breakdancer having the opportunity to compete
This is an issue with some of the other Olympic sports too - I'm heavily involved in competitive target shooting, but pretty much no-one is interested in the very niche and boring type of shooting the Olympics have (with the exception of clay target shooting), and most of the shooters I know wouldn't even know *how* to get involved with the Olympic track if they suddenly decided that shooting at things with air pistols (legally Not A Firearm in pretty much every other country on the planet) was their jam.
Yeah that’s what I don’t understand- surely she’s observed and interviewed some great breakers in the course of her research- would you not shoulder tap them when the Oceania comp came to being rather than take it on yourself? The whole thing is weird and a lot of that seems to be on her.
They didn't show up at the qualifier, probably because they are not on the ballroom dancing mailing list.
I think people forget that the Olympics was originally about amateur athletes. They only opened it up to professionals in the 90s, and they still allow amateurs to compete.

Some sports have moved to have their professional teams compete but there are so many smaller sports where the sports top professionals don't compete and instead you get amateurs. 

Boxing, archery, curling, skate boarding are all examples.

Also the first year that the Olympics are held for a sport tends to attract the amateurs. I'd imagine that would particularly be the case for most dance forms - professionals are working dancers (think ballet troupes, dance instructors) and they don't tend to attract government or sport association funding for their work in the way swimmers or soccer teams do. Hell breakdancing in Australia didn't even have a national body to fund.

This means in order to compete in some kind of qualifying championship they're taking time away from work and further time away to go to Paris. They'll also need to contend with contract clauses that probably were written without consideration to competing in the Olympics (I'm thinking clauses around sponsorship, competitions, vacation time etc)

Most professionals will need to ask themselves is competing in the Olympics worth the cost?

If someone has great talent they're probably making a living out of it and might choose not to disrupt that living in order to compete in a one off event.

Edit to add: all of that means that you may not have "great talent" entering competitions for the Olympics. It leaves the field open to people who are amateurs *because by IOC rules they are allowed to compete, and they are encouraged to compete because that was the Olympic spirit* and if they qualify they qualify. Rather than blaming that amateurs for attempting to qualify maybe look to why the best of the subculture in Australia didn't qualify.
You're asking why someone who knew they'd be the worst participant still makes a choice to go to the Olympics?

People don't decline being Olympians out of fear of being bad. We've seen swimmers that nearly drown and skaters that can't do an ollie competing before. It's part of the tradition of the games to bring participants from all over the world together and invite participation from nations that may not be elite at an event. This isn't unusual at all.
I mean it only takes a little bit of self delusion and an underlying want to be an Olympian to say "I'll go and do my own thing and have my chance in the spotlight" rather than "represent my country proudly." She sounds like a bit of a nutjob academic.

It's like Eddie the Eagle vibes but much weirder.
>but surely she was aware of the talent that exists in the sub culture right?

Who are the best female breakers in Australia?
She was aware it was almost entirely men in the sport mate. She might really be the best b-girl she knows because as the entire point of much of her research - there literally is barely any.

She's not that bad. She does clearly know the technical side of the sport. She's just very much not an athlete. If there's better bgirls they probably aren't going to meet ups but practising quietly at home.
Gumtree
They put up a flyer at the Sydney Ballroom Dancing Institute, I'm not sure what else people expected them to do smh my head
Could be internal advertising, to those within the dancesport community.
I think the men's breaking demonstrated how it fits as an Olympic sport tbh. It's better than synchronised swimming or dressage lol.
Cockiness is part of the demeanor of break dancing.
Cockiness has never won the hearts of Australians.
yeah that’s why i can’t take any of this backlash seriously the people who actually know what they’re talking about like it so nothing else matters
That's correct. The AIS or Australian Sports Commission (can't remember which) identified key sports that we excel at and have a higher chance of winning at on the international stage. Those sports receive a lot more funding; distributed to the state institutes that manage the national team or individual athletes. They will have access to sport psychologists, exercise scientists, sport dieticians, strength and conditioning coaches, technical support, sport specific coaches, whereas say, someone competing in Climbing/Shooting/Breakdancing will get some of this, but not all, and often it's not as well managed (as this may fall on the governing body of that sport to manage) compared to Hockey/Swimming/Rowing/Sprint Cycling.
Yes and she entered the international qualifying event and came 38 out of 40. That just reinforced my belief that the breaking community in Australia is simply too small for a world class b-girl to emerge.
They’ve been doing an Olympics show on ABC Radio each day.
Hiphop had to be the single most commercialised "counter-culture" lmfao.
Terje, who is basically a godfather of snowboarding, was famously against the Olympics. Scott Steven's absolutely devastates most riders in skill and he doesn't compete. In in response to x games vs Olympics, Halldor and Eiki Helgason compete in x games but hate the Olympics. Just to name a couple but there are many many more.
PHD in cultural studies, not breakdancing
I don't get it. I don't know anything about breakdancing, but in every video I've seen, her opponent is clearly better than she is. Why does she keep winning these competitions?
[deleted]
Isn’t this the crux of the issue? There is no international peak body for breaking.
Go to instagram, there are breakdancers of 20 years of experience who are blaming her for the Olympics for cancelling it for Los Angeles. Accusing her or not only embarrassing Australia but all breakdancers around the world. The hate is strong.

Edit: I personally know they cancelled LA before the event started, I am just describing what she is being accused of on Instagram
> If I was a breakdancer, I'd legit hate this person for making the sport look bad.

Let's be real, the public opinion on breakdancing was never going to improve, especially as most real breakdancers wouldn't got anywhere near the olympics.
That is not true. If there was a legit breakdancer that wanted to compete they'd have gone to the champs she won and mopped the floor with her. If you read the article you will see that three competitors she beat tried to qualify through another event and were 3 out of the bottom 4. The reality is that she is the best Aussie female breaker that either wanted to or knew how to qualify. If there's a secret bgirl out there better than her they didn't show up to qualify.
Where is the legitimate breakdancer that missed out? There was a qualification process and she qualified. Not just as the guaranteed entry from Australia but as the guaranteed entry from all of Oceania. 3 of the Australian b-girls she had already beaten in the Oceania Championships then tried to qualify again at the international qualifying event and did not do well.
Exactly - it could have been a life changing experience for someone but no let’s just take it on to purposely be “the underdog”. She knew
Have you heard of Rachael Gunn?
If she is the best we have in Australia, then we shouldn’t have sent any. She has a phd in this stuff. And coincidently is also the best female we have in Australia that does this. Who is she studying then ? If she is actually the best, then she has nothing worth studying.
That’s not true at all there are lots of and if she needs the technical side of the sport she wouldn’t have scored zero
Exactly! I don't think most people complaining here have actual watched any break dancing competitions!
I absolutely agree, but imagine Steph Curry doing his go to sleep move after absolutely bricking a shot he would look like an idiot, that's how it looked
Bullshit, cockiness wins the hearts of Australians, so long as it's a man that's cocky, Paul Hogan, Steve Irwin, Shane Warne, etc...
Please tell me they covered this event….
idk if i would consider that "A lot of the worlds best" when the overlap on xgames and olympics rosters is basically 1:1 now. like 1 guy not participating when every other athlete is is not "a lot". check the winners of xgames and virtually all of them have been to an olympics

and yes there are a lot of great snowboarders who never competed because they dont do park stuff. theyre busy in the backcountry riding vertical lines and deep powder - the real fun part of snowboarding anyways. but its not really fair to say they hate the olympics when they dont do. those events in the first place
Here is the weakness with “creative” sports, it’s entirely subjective. And the on screen experience never matches what the live audience sees and feels either.

Her style at Paris was quite different though. The routines are entirely improvised and are supposed to be in time to the music which they only hear in the moment. It’s pretty difficult, even without the sheer physicality of it. I think potentially she cracked a bit under the pressure. To go from being a big fish in a tiny Australian pond to being an old fish at an enormous international event is a lot.

Also I don’t think the Australians actually thought they had any chance. If the IOC hadn’t reserved two places for dancers from Oceania Australia would not have qualified at all.
Yep the way she danced in the Destructive Steps YouTube video I linked to was very different.

Potentially if it became a permanent Olympic sport there would be an impetus for investment.

But breaking is a subculture and that feels at odds with the strict hierarchies and rankings that the Olympics are based on.
She has a PhD in breakdancing. She is in the community. She is just a terrible dancer lol
That decision happened well before last week's fiasco. 

LA will have "Flag football" instead  - that's sort of a "Touch NFL".
“Gone to the champs” appears to be a closed door affair with members of the ballroom dancing community
Which is part of the problem with breaking as an Olympic sport - it doesn’t have the existing hierarchical governing bodies and networks to filter competitors through.
I watched the final and honestly the Molly who she was going against looked better than her. There were so many things that were so off about this.
Not even that though? I cannot dance, but if I knew I was going to the Olympics for it, I’d at least learn something that wouldn’t make me look like an embarrassment?
It was a life-changing experience - for her.  Don't hate the player, hate the game... 😉
Saying there is lots of doesn't make it so. 

Given they handed out a lot of zeroes to a lot of competitors I don't think that's how they were judging.
So she JR Smith's it?

If that was after some Hennessey and other substances not legal here, maybe?
It’s weekdays at 11 so hopefully tomorrow?
It is very fair to say that https://whitelines.com/archive/features/debate/terje-haakonsen-why-i-still-hate-the-olympics.html
Yep, and Raygun herself has been outspoken about the lack of any proper funding.
A PhD in breakdancing seems like something that completely goes against the culture...
Right people are so stupid they seriously thing a beast like the olympics that moves at the speed of a manatee would actually make a split second decision to remove an event based on one performance not even a week ago.
You only have to say things with confidence to get people to agree with you.
I'd learn to do a really convincing fake injury about 10 seconds in, go down a hero that never really got their chance...
Watch her qualifying performances, they are shit but they're better than what happened at the Olympics.
It was definitely life changing for her, probably not the way she hoped though.
This saying doesn't work when the players have: information, autonomy and moral aptitude.

She knew she was terrible, she knew her skill level was borderline embarrassing to represent a nation.

How many taxpayer dollars are spent per athlete?
How will this affect our international image as a proud sporting nation?
How many actual underground, disadvantaged B-girls/boys could have genuinely competed if effort was made to discover the talent?

Raygun seems to have the information (knew she couldn't compete), the autonomy (she chose to go), but lacked the moral thinking to ask - "Should I go, is there anyone more deserving, and as a representative/educator for this sport what can I do to increase the image of the sport?".

Raygun took the ego boost, embarassed our country, and defaced the sport. This ammounts to Moral Terputude.
Chapeau to you for your service.
Omg can someone please post a link!
Iirc She's a gender study person who wrote her PhD on gender themes in the breakdancing subculture. She wasn't like a dancing major or anything.
In the first round against Logistx she didn't seem that horrendously bad, the american clearly outclassed her but it wasn't at the level of the kangaroo hop and the sprinkler 'drunk dad dancing' she was roasted for in all the clips that kept popping up.
