
If they were stolen or otherwise inappropriately obtained, they should be returned.

If the museum obtained them legally or appropriately but chooses to return them, they should be allowed to return them.

Unless there's some other unique and irreplaceable attribute to them that justifies *why* they should be kept, any other discussion outside of "*what the current owner wants to do*" is just pointless hand-wringing and pearl-clutching from the type of people who'd normally decry that sort of thing.
You know there is way bigger issues than this, especially for indigenous. NT is a hellhole for the next gen.
Who cares?
They do come back.... like that's thier whole thing
> doesn't seem a good reason

Other than the cultural significance? Seems like a pretty good reason to me
They're just sticks, give them back. It's not my history.
If the boomerang pictured stayed in a European museum, it’s just throwing stick on display. 

If it comes to Tennant Creek, some kid will notice that long part is a lever to build kinetic energy during the throw. 

They will also see how the wood grain follows the shape of the weapon to prevent it snapping, and how it is purposely shaped to be an aero foil. 

Much better option. Although if it weren’t preserved by the museum, it would have been lost to time. Then the kid wouldn’t have seen it.
I thought i'd see hell freeze over before the british ever returned stuff from their museum's lol
Thieving Poms
Fuck critics.
I think there's probably benefit in these objects beong offered to be returned, but to say "keep them and display them appropriately with adequate context" is the best outcome, outside of objects with genuine cultural significance.

If they are relics or cultural artefacts, I believe returning them or borrowing them with permission of the appropriate elders makes sense. If they are like any other object, they can probably be displayed with appropriate context.

I don't think everyone has the luxury of travelling the whole world to experience every different culture, so I'm fine with some items being displayed from different cultures - most preferably with the permission and advice as to context of that culture.
Sensible comments, on reddit? On a Sunday morning?
They were stolen, along with a generation of aboriginal children..... At least the boomerangs can be returned.
Neither side of government wants to do anything effective when it comes to problems within indigenous communities because it's become such a hotbed. 

All you're going to get is far too late probably empty apologies about things done in the past by the government, acknowledgements of owners of land past, present and future, and the occasional returning of traditional artifacts as a bone while mining companies still get free reign to steamroll and demolish traditional landmarks.

All in all, I still wouldn't be holding out for the government to really do much for the indigenous on a substantial level, best advice for anyone living in the NT would be to just get out as soon as possible.
Not the proper ones

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jFp6gpLiKAk
>Although if it weren’t preserved by the museum, it would have been lost to time. Then the kid wouldn’t have seen it.


It will be interesting to see if these items carefully preserved for centuries will get the same level of reverence and care in Australia.
Weird cope
Australians are the thieves, the British colonists rebranded themselves to help with narrative. The people you now refer to as Poms are often indigenous to their own islands and stole nothing. Want to find thieves? Look at the USA, Australians, New Zealand, and Canada. It's nothing to do with us.
Sometimes, we like to mess with your mind.
Why did Australian colonists take artefacts to a British museum and how is it that they are reporter the British not returning the artefacts?
