Gumtree has gone downhill like everytbing since the pandemic, used to be 50/50 scammer, now it is like 90% scams.

However it is owned by ebay so makes sense for then to destroy it, was actually wondering why it wasnt sooner, anyone else experience this now?

Edit: Apparently ebay no longer owns gumtree, sold to Adevinta in 2020. Certainly gone to shit since then.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
> However it is owned by ebay

Hasn't been for years - they sold it back in 2020~21, and it's on to it's second owner since then.
Are people still using Gumtree??
I'm trying to sell things there. Had someone seemingly interested then offered to organise shopping no worries. Without knowing the size or weight of the object.

Then there's the constant messages from gumtree "admin" from new accounts.
When I was living in NQ and preparing to move, I found it heaps good and was able to get rid of a lot furniture and items around the house. That was in 2021 up to Dec 21. When I got to Sydney to list more things I wanted to get rid of, at the start of 2022, all I got was scammers. Bizarre as I was pretty much selling continuously, so is location dictating this?
Yep replaced by marketplace, even then marketplace is full of scammers but at least relatively easy to tell.
Facebook marketplace is on its way aswell
It's just the enshitification process. The low barriers to entry means it's rife with ai and/or pondscum. I could be ai. 
I posted an add on gumtree a few months ago, for the first time in forever. Within 5 mins, I got three identical scam messages from multiple different users with generic names. It seems like they’re not even doing the most basic scam/spam detection. I pulled the ad down because it was just more of a hassle to have it up, and I think that sums up the state of gumtree now. I’m no fan of Facebook, but marketplace is far better these days.
Fake job ads asking for police checks to get the job only they don't want you to apply for the check they want you to send all your doc's and they will apply for it. I hate to think how many people desperately looking for work fall for it.
I rarely sell/buy from there anymore, because of scammers and people who ghost. But I find it's still alright for odd jobs. i.e. You need 3 tons of soil removed from the front. Or a heavy fridge moved around the house.
Definitely a lot less items on gumtree these days.  I think there are a lot more scams on Marketplace, a lot more items though.  

Unfortunately this is now the world we live in now, just learn to ID scams and only pay on pickup
Yeah we really need a good alternative. eBay fees are through the roof, Facebook bans any attempt I make at making an account even though I literally never had an account in my life until I wanted to use marketplace, I don't sell on gumtree but have bought a few things (or tried to and been ignored) -- I tried to sell there in the past but lowballs of $50 on something going for $350 is not worth my time at all
Shows how little law enforcement cares about these things, how easy it is to find scams online, but nothing is done about them. It's no wonder these are so prolific, when there are no consequences.
Can confirm it 🤦
Craigtree
I've been worried about this. I have a really good fridge to sell. How should I  
 go about doing that now?
Adelaide experience 

Had to down size to a unit, placed many adds on GT. Sold everything within a week. Zero scams, everyone turned up when they said they would, no one tried to haggle the price (admittedly was because all items way under anyone else selling stuff). Just basically wanted the equivalent of a nice bottle of wine. 

Was not expecting the positive outcome at all.
Feels like it. Tried using it again this year. Gave up due to constant scammer messages.
I use Gumtree a fair bit and never had a problem.
I'd honestly be happy if Amazon made something for selling shit, Gumtree and Marketplace are dogshit.
Ah thanks didnt know, will correct. Is this the reason for how fast it has gone downhill? Any suggestions on where else to sell, ebay has high fees that has gone up and up, FB is scammy as hell as well...
I hate Facebook. But there really is nothing worthwhile there anymore.
Just the scammers
Thinking about it purely to try and get rid of our baby swing. Facebook keeps taking our ad down due to a “recall”. The baby swing in question isn’t a recalled product, lol
Lived on an oil rig?
I think so, to the extent that overseas scammers know that Sydney is a city in Australia. Not so much Mackay, for example
I don’t really have problems with it in Adelaide.
Theres 8 billion people in the world and most of them are in 3rd world countries. You can’t get mad at them for having a crack
i sometimes see porno pics/sites disguised as a paid ad for a business of some sort and whenever i report to FB they tell me it didnt go against community standards.

like a picture of two naked people doing doggy style, tits hanging out etc, but its title is for some sort of business/product. if you click the image to see the posting you end up on a bang buddy site.

yet a friend makes a comment on their locked down page about sex/relationships, i post a shitty low brow meme of a cave man banging a dinosaur and get an instant warning for community standards LOL
If you are AI then I'm pond scum
That's because of the type of thing that's being sold, Scammers will only go with items that they can claim their brother / friend will come pick up once the item is sold etc, or delivered.
How do you get your account banned on FB? I use mine purely for marketplace and shit posting.
It is actually even worse then that, you see, if you get scammed they will say it is not their problem its a civil issue. But if you rock up to the scammers place, it is deemed criminal and you get into trouble, the law literally protects the scammer.
The authorities are too busy fining people $1200 for a passenger having their seat belt under their arm (in QLD anyway).
Must be all good then
Same, just got a good GPU deal there
The same thing would happen. You can’t prevent scammers
People who complain about eBay fees have no idea what a typical auction house (e.g. 10~15% or more seller's premium, + photographing/catalogue/listing fees, etc) or commission seller (10~50%) charges. eBay's ~13.5% or whatever is actually reasonably cheap.

Like it or not, all the action these days is on FB Marketplace - though it's just as / more rife with scammers & timewasters than Gumtree.
All the real listings are just on Facebook now, leaving nothing but oldies and scams on gumtree.
Facebook seam to have removed all the scammers in my past 7 or so sales
Credit where it's due, that's one possibility.
I have no idea, it happens automatically after 20-30 minutes even after just browsing and not even sending a message. Once I reviewed it and confirmed my identity and it got lifted, and the next day was banned again and this time the review was rejected

I once had someone else create the account for me with my details and email, they used it no problem, as soon as I logged into it it got banned

Facebook have absolutely no support system in place to explain why it happens. I've figured out a halfarsed way to browse things then I need to send the listing to a sibling and get them to message for me but "my brother will pick it up" sounds like a straight up scam

It's bloody annoying considering the shit I read about happening on there and I just want to use marketplace but can't
I'd say 90% of these scammers are actually located overseas (lol india)
Honestly where are 10-15% auction houses, they all seem to be 20-25 when I look.
Very funny
So common it’s become a meme. I remember someone posted a picture of massive fish being taken by a huge shark under an oil rig, and the top comment was “are you the guy who wanted to buy my car”😂
Huh...  I have a handful of burner accounts that I've made over time. Literally seconds of effort put into creating them. Never had one of them banned.
You need to supply a phone number or FB will shut the account down.
Yeah that's what confuses me, every man and his dog has a fake account. Unfortunately I can't even reach out to them to establish an account or even get an explanation

There must be some sort of data they're keeping somewhere that flags me but no idea what it could be. It's bloody annoying because everything local is on marketplace or the noticeboards
Yeah that's pretty weird. My burners have obviously fake names - Joe Blow, Rusty Venture etc etc
