
Nothing new.  Job providers dont give two hoots about you, they just want the "We got you a job" bonus.
The whole industry is a joke. They pop up near Centrelink service centres like buzzards around a carcass feeding off the misery of the unemployed and underemployed.

Money directed at Workforce Australia would be better spent properly resourcing Centrelink. This whole mutual obligation infrastructure is designed by the same people responsible for the robodebt fiasco and is designed to punish. 

ALP have two years to unwind this nonsense and have left it in place. Very disappointing.
>He said there is a focus on “high-value customers” who can net providers more money and strong encouragement from managers to push people into jobs, even if it may endanger their physical or mental wellbeing.

This is often disabled people they do this to. Disabled people are often forced in to jobs and activities they are not capable of, and threatened with financial punishment if they dont comply, all so the JSP can make a profit.

Some horror stories Ive heard:

- Deaf person being told to get a job as a telemarketer.

- People who were hospitalized being financially punished for not attending appointments.

- People with back injury or chronic pain being forced in to highly laborious hands-on jobs.

- People who can only work a few hours, being pushed in to full-time jobs.

- Job providers not offering phone appointments to housebound and severely ill people.

Seriously, they do not care if people are injured or even die from disability if it means making money off them. For example, many work-for-the-dole participants are disabled people, and many work-for-the-dole work sites are not safe work places, people have died in the program.

JSPs and mutual obligations need to be abolished. 

We all know from Covid lockdowns people cant stand being still too long, so we know people will look for paid or volunteer work on their own. There is no reason to punish people for being unemployed. And at any rate, JSP's will not help people find suitable work, they only do whatever lines their own pockets.
This will hardly come as as a shock to anyone who has had anything to do with job service providers. The entire industry is built on scamming the government using the most vulnerable people in society. Siphoning of funds that could actually be put to use helping people while simultaneously causing people mental anguish. The people who run these JSP's should be put behind bars.
>Over the past 10 years, the government has increased its evidence requirements and the easiest method is payslips. The strict KPI culture meant some would resort to “unscrupulous” behaviour such as providers contacting employers to re-negotiate a start date to get more funding, he claimed.
Oh, so the things we've known and talked about for years is actually true, what.a.shocker!
They’re basically real estate agents but for jobs. Parasites who offer no value and rort the living fuck out of everyone due to a complete lack of oversight. They could all drop off a cliff tomorrow and no one would miss the industry.
About 15 years ago when I had just returned to the country and required Centrelink I was assigned to one of the job network providers who were late for the initial interview they set up to meet with me, then the person interviewing me was also the receptionist who continued doing reception work constantly interrupting the interview. They then took my perfectly good resume and rewrote it, with factually incorrect information as well we being poorly formatted. They then informed me that they actually would not be providing any assistance to me as I appeared to not require any help at all. A few weeks later when i had found a job they kept calling me trying to get the details of my new employer, and I told them it’s none of their business as they did nothing to assist me and actually would have made it worse and i absolutely do not want them contacting my new employer. Honestly the most incompetent people I have ever met. They did not deserve a single cent they were trying to claim as far as I was concerned.
lol This could be found by auditing any of them.
A company defrauding the Government...? Unheard of!
How is this news? Literally every time I got a job they would call me to try and pressure me into giving them the details and I would always refuse.
the whole industry is a fraud. massive transfer of public monies into private hands. defund it and fund ubi.
A friend of mine has a neurological issue and struggles to walk so uses a wheelchair or a walker (if only walking a very short distance). The JSA told her she had a job and she asked if they were aware of her disability and were ok with her limitations. She was assured everything was discussed and they were more than happy to accommodate her. Well she gets there, the business is on the second floor with no elevator. Not to mention steps to get into the building and no ramp. She was suspended for failing to attend the job.
I got a strike for not attending an appointment because I was working.

I told them repeatedly that I wouldn't be attending. They didn't care and refused to move the appointment.

Edit: Oh, they then had the gall to try and get me to sign a document that said they got me the job when I got it through word of mouth.
I was pushed into a "job trial" for pizza hut here as a delivery driver in I believe late 2022.

Mind you, I came out as transgender about a year prior, if that, and as of now, have been out of work for 8 years, tried studying intermittently in the interim.

Didn't realise until after the first and only 'shift', why I felt so awful, but...

I was pressured into it by the JSP worker, who then rushed into an 'interview' which was literally just *here's the owner of the two stores in town*, who then asked *me*, how soon I could start, and that was basically it...

'Cause of the rush, the pants I was forced to get for it didn't fit well, as did the provided shirt, which I realised much later, combined to give me gender dysphoria on top of the rest of the stress.

I was then misgendered the entire night, despite at least two attempts to correct them on my pronouns, having a feminine name, black-painted nails, and hair long enough for a (short) ponytail.

I also just happened to be paired with a driver to 'learn from', who, on the way back from our last delivery that night, brought up "transgenders" and "destroying their bodies", and being fine with that, "just keep kids out of it" (also mentioned trump once, after that, just as we arrived back)...

&nbsp;

I already had/have what I'm realising is likely trauma of some kind from my 5 years at macca's, but even discounting any of that, I'm diagnosed ASD & ADHD (meds for the latter in 2018), that is *not* a healthy environment for me to be in, as the constant panic attacks at macca's would suggest...

Still, after 6 years out of work, and recently coming out as trans, a job trial as a delivery driver for a fucking pizza place is not exactly an *ideal* 're-entering the workforce' position...

Had a meltdown in my housemate's lap at 2am about it (dissociated the drive home, then *at* home, 'til then), and got my shit together ASAP to finally get a DSP application in... which took 11 months to finally get rejected, and I need to go through that process all over again, but that's besides the point...

&nbsp;

I have been trying for the last 8 fucking years, to get Centrelink off my fucking ass, so I can work on myself, find what I can *and enjoy* doing, and find meaningful employment... but it is nigh impossible for me to do that, with the threat of homelessness, starvation, and/or death looming overhead...
I had a job capacity assessment when I was about 22. I was assessed at 8 hours a week. I was told by my JSA to go to a “job ready course”

This started Monday morning and I was sick as a dog but I went anyway. Left 2 hours in because I was vomiting every 5 mins. Didn’t go back until Wednesday. They breeched me because I didn’t get a doctors cert.

 I called the disability services line who were furious- because my JCA was 8 hours a week that meant they couldn’t make me do more than 8 hours a week in total for any activity, and because there was more than 8 hours of the training left the breech was wiped from my account. They also transferred me to a specialist disability provider.
its scamming public monies and the gov collaborating/ facilitating/ promoting it. useless nacc.
'Non profit'

Vultures
Honestly, the number of "dole bludgers" out there vs people actually wanting to work that can't, you could probably just raise most of the benefits by redirecting the funding, and that would boost those willing to work into positions to be able to do so.

Let the chaff stay chaff and frankly not worry about them because they make up such a small portion and I'm sick of seeing people who deserve a chance, and WANT an opportunity, miss out.
Fucking hate this so much, I triple check with them when they say they're lining me up for something, then I have to check with whoever is interviewing me because I don't want to waste their time and lo and behold, I'm wasting their time! Thankfully the employers have been understanding of my situation and I haven't been punished or had support cut off due to the job provider fuckwits mucking us around.
