
WFH is a win win for both business and workers. Business can save tons of $$ for not having to pay rent. Workers can save on transport and time and mental health.  Why are they wanting so much to make a few commercial landlords so f/ rich?
"NSW Premier Chris Minns this week said 'overseas studies' showed people were less productive when working from home."


So? You could fire half the staff in our office and still get the same financial results overall. Doesn't mean we are going to do it.


Think of the amount of performative work that has no value like writing reports no one reads, people who tick boxes on forms that don't make any difference, producing software that does not improve productivity etc. This is analogues of the Australian economy where a small number of people in select industries create most economic value and the remainder of the population are selling over-priced coffee to one another. That's why increasing the overall population isn't increasing material prosperity in Australia.


Imagine Minns went for a swim and was lost at sea for six months would it have a material impact on most people's lives in the state? Probably not. He's not a transformational leader pushing for change.


This is a classic misunderstanding of economics. 
We dont need overseas experts to weigh in on Australian work culture. 

We know that there wasnt a noticeable decline in productivity during lock-downs. (with exception of covids impacts) 

Minns is a fool to put this rule forward. 

If they push ahead with this then most people already started talking about working to rule. Do their hours and leave.   
No more "free work"

There is also subtle talk of bending these rules, like having one team go in every week so that there some people there for no reason. 

Personally I can concentrate a lot better when im not being interrupted by co-workers making small talk, being distracted with office life like phone calls etc.

Plus a lot of people have invested a good amount of money for a good home office set up. I know my multi-screen ,mechanic keyboard set up is a lot better than single screen generic keyboard mouse set up that i have to pack/unpack everyday thanks to hot desking.
The company my wife works for rented a large two story building prior to COVID. After people had been working from home the companies productivity went up. She has been working from home ever since and only goes into the office once every month or two.
Ensuring that remote workers are productive requires managers who have appropriate skills and workplace contracts that allow an employer to hold an employee to KPIs and not just hours worked.

Those are positive changes whether the staff are in an office or remote.

The benefit then is that you can employ people from a wider geographical area. I work in Queensland and my skills are in demand in SEQ but an employer would need to be paying very, very well if they want me to go back to hours of commuting each day.
'Experts' hahaha.
I worked from home for a year before I retired and I did literally no work except zoomed in for a few meetings

I’m retired now and I go to the gym during the day and it is full of people “working” from home

Good luck to them but I wouldn’t be paying them out of my wallet
Peak working from home is sending one email and going back to sleep
Gee I wonder who the property owners have ties with? Oh the property tycoons in gov.
Don't forget you can probably trim 2 to 3 levels of management due to wfh. Increased use of it to ensure workers are working
Those studies were cherry picked and only reveal incompetent management.

Apart from the losses to commercial landlords the real crime of WFH was exposing that most managers are worthless and have no idea how to measure their subordinates productivity. If they aren't in the office doing performative "work" like hovering over shoulders then their neck is on the block.
If you don’t think service nsw went downhill once people started working from home you haven’t been paying attention
So, you've had conversations with all these strangers and they told you they're all working from home? Or are you just assuming?
Well thank god you retired then! Last thing we need is more dead weight in the workforce lol
Ok boomer.
I mean, I manage staff and most of them are awesome but at least one does literally nothing when WFH.

That's not an argument against WFH though, it's an argument against retaining shit employees.
yes it was WFH and not the chronic under resourcing of the roles and the reliance on overpriced contingent hire.
This dude doesnt make any sense , If i go to the office i am allowed to go gym at lunch time as well.  
 Lots of buildings now have nice showers, change rooms etc and a gym close by . Pretty much encouraged to make use of the facilities 

dude is just bitter.
Well not all of them but I chat to people, you can take it or leave it, it’s just my experience
Hahaha, whoosh
Well it was the lack of physical people on site that led to massive queues if that’s what you mean
It’s not lunchtime my friend, I’m retired, I go at 10 am

I’m not bitter, as I said, good luck to them
sorry but you dont know what you are talking about. 

There is not many WFH roles at the office front of service NSW. 

This rule would never impact them. 

Good luck in your retirement.  Im sure there are some clouds you can tell at.
Paid 1 hour break can be taken at anytime an employee wants. Doesn't mean someone isn't working because you see them at 10am when the gyms quiet and they eat at their desk.
oh no how dare people have work life balance. 

Buddy you are not their manager, you dont know their arrangements.
My partner works from home. Does an extra hour from 8-9 before work and usually works until 6. This extra 1.5h means we can walk the dog at 1030 and again at 3.

Neighbours probably think she doesn't work considering she's always out with the dog... But just like you, they don't actually know what's going on.
Fair enough, wasn’t aware I was yelling, service clearly improved
Hahaha, ok then
