Pretty much only watch streaming these days, so I haven’t been exposed to him on a regular basis before. 

Every time he opened his mouth I cringed.  Why’s he so popular?

The night team was pretty good, Ally Langdon and James Bracey were much more genuine. 

Also, who was that guy doing the athletics interviews?


 Cutting away from the women’s sport climbing just as the penultimate climber was about to start… who won the gold while we had to watch some random volleyball.
Have mostly been watching tack and field via the 9Now app and had some great international commentary.

Was a shock going back to Ch9 and listening to dickhead Tony Jones ask inane questions after someone's just busted their gut on the track.

Edit: I'd like to add that Dylan Alcott is also a blight on the coverage. True cockwit
That shit when Karl and Co got foreigners to eat Tim Tams dipped in Vegemite and then laughed like it's the funniest thing they've ever seen.
He was on the tv in the background while I was at work the other day, he asked a couple of women Olympians a question, talked over them half way through their answer. What a dickhead.
My wife and I were watching the women’s climbing, and with one climber left to go, channel 9 went to an add.
I watched part of an interview with him and Cate Campbell, and it was an absolute train wreck. 

He put on this sad soft tone and was trying to pull on the heartstrings and attempting to get her to cry.
At one stage, she had to tell him to stop and that it's not about her it's about the other athletes. 

Gosh it was awkward.
Sorry to say this but Dylan Alcott. 

Nothing on him but his voice is just a bit annoying. He really isn’t that great of a TV host.
For me it's the same fucking ads every ad break.
KS thinks he is funny but is anything but.
Karl respects no one but himself and every interview or commentary is always about either him or some sexist "one of the lads" rubbish fake laughter gags.  I honestly try very hard not to watch him at all if I can
Equestrian Eventing was horribly produced for everyone, no one in the world had good coverage of that event, guys on the ground were having some serious issues with AV. A real shame because it was set in the beautiful grounds of Versailles.
Karl is the embodiment of everything wrong with Aus tv, yet he is always lauded as the 'best we have'. He's always been condescending, and often talks down to and over women. 

His jokes are poor and when he makes an effort to do something serious, it just comes off as insincere. Kept trying to force that friendship with Michael Johnson too.
Eddie maguire would be up there as well
9now coverage of the marathon was elite. Channel 9s commentary had a triple jumper commentate it...
Chompers (genuinely can’t remember his real name) was the interviewer. He’s a bit cringy but seems to have a good relationship with the athletes? I didn’t think Karl was terrible… but certainly wasn’t great. I think he’s popular because he seems kind of genuine, in that unpolished way? Like… not a genuinely nice person or anything, but at least isn’t putting up an obviously false front, if that makes sense. Agree that Bracey and Langdon were good! And at least we barely saw Eddie…
Ahhhh, Mark Taylor commentating the Diving!
the worse part was that I couldn't watch the opening ceremony at x 2 speed. It goes for hours and we should be able to put it on speed instead of listening to nines crap commentary. Plus I had to create an account with nine. (note to self cancel account) 

Plus Channel Nine didn't know didn't know anything about Assasin's Creed and called him that strange guy... 

The whole gender war thing to do with women boxing. 
then the love and hate of the Australian break dancer. Her social media posts are meant to be assume. 

The fact that individuals who served in the IDF in the last 12 months are allowed to compete in the games without the IOC commenting. War is the most violent form of politics and the games is meant to be politically free.  Why were they not excluded? But they disqualified an Afghan female for advocating for female rights.  Something is politically wrong with the whole thing.
Watching the same tv ads every 5-10 minutes. If I hear tones and I or Alex Lloyd once more I will rip my ears off
As somebody who studied French (when studying a language was a per-requisite to university), there was zero comprehension of French language or culture. Apart from a visit to a boulangerie (snort snort). Nothing but bogans.

In the opening ceremony there was music by  5-6 French composers. The bogan commentators were oblivious.
The coverage has been pretty shit. Too much they didn’t show.
If I hear Tones and I ever again I’ll KMS
He is popular because the channel 9 execs love him for god knows what reason. But the Olympics by channel nine should be called “Golf: featuring other sports”
That stupid tones and I song on every ad. My god.
What irked me the most is them replaying events without telling us, so I was thinking it was the final race because there’s no REPLAY title which they had on some other replayed events.
Stan was pretty good, just wish they had an Australian centric alternative to 9, instead you 8 other countries with there own channels and anything related to Australia you had to find yourself.
Don't know, I watched on Stan.
He's not popular anymore. He was when he was part of a team with Lisa Wilkinson but he quickly lost his status when she asked his support to get the same pay as him and he straight up said "You're on your own". She quit within a week I think.
I’ve exclusively watched Stan and it’s been great. Sounds like I made the right decision.
The lack of onscreen infographics during events showing who is currently leading the event . It was hard to follow along lots of events properly. 

Nine generally did a good job. I would blame the Olympics people for the footage they gave Nine. They are a bit amateur.
The worst for me was the "The thing i'm reporting on is just casually happening in the background" thing Channel 9 kept doing on the News. Made me cringe every time.
The decisions made by TV executives that viewers would rather see station celebrities in a studio rather than more events.

Also as time went on they kept increasing the time with medal winner interviews instead of showing events.

I'm sure both of those rate with some demographics, but the sport/screen time ratio just got worse the more successful Australia was.
biggest bargain is a borrowed stan account and paying $15 to not have ads and listen to bbc etc commentary the channel 9 ads were insufferable every company trying to link themselves to gold. The stadium was clean, no ads. Why suffer them.
The worst part is the commentators constantly referring to the Australians as "gutsy", "brave", and "courageous". What the fuck is courageous about trying to run fast and getting beaten by people who ran faster
The worst part has been hearing that Alex Lloyd song closely followed by the bloody Tones and I song every freakin’ 5 minutes
The Stefanovics are utter cunts.

Karl is a shill and Peter is an absolute prick who I hope never to see on Australian television again.

I kind of detest Ally Langdon, too, just by her association with Karl and for the fact that she happily laughed along inanely to his bullshit while they were on air together,
Did you see Karl's reaction to when the power walker that proposed to her boyfriend in the stand? Jesus Christ it pissed me off. That and 'What was my favourite Toyota moment'. What an absolute cunt.
Avoided the pain of nine’s terrible coverage by watching on Stan Sport. 

Unfortunately that also meant having to deal with american commentators and boy can they fucking lather it on hard. And it’s all pro seppo too. 

I vividly remember them describing Ariana Titmus’ silver effort in the women’s 800 as keeping Katie Ladecky honest and making her have to work for it. 
No dickhead, titmus was there to win gold and only needed a few extra lengths to get it. 

LA is gonna be a harsh lesson for the yanks when their few medal haulers are all retired and the more diverse competitors from other countries are still fresh and young.
I didn’t hear one single second of the channel 9 commentary team.

Who the fuck watches the garbage that is the main channel?
To be fair they actually showed a fair bit of footage. Some past years it been 95% ads, What’s Coming Next!, ‘Zany’ Banter, and stomach churning inspirational montages on endless repeat.
Andy Lee’s comparison man segments. Concept is good; but the problem is no one at Channel 9 told Andy that he isn’t the funny one.
More white blonde girls brought to you by Ch9 and Harvey Norman oi oi oi.
Watched via BBC iPlayer
I paid Stan the $15 for added sports and have just been watching the full replays of my chosen sports. Only the world feed commentators who have, on the whole, been knowledgeable and respectful. A much better experience in my opinion if you can afford it ($27 for the month lowest cost if you didn’t already have Stan)
Channel 9 coverage has been shit. Might just be my anti-9 bias, but yeah. If I see shit, I know what is shit, and if it sounds like shit, well, you get the picture.

Also sports coverage on free tv ranking:

1. Channel 10. The Big Bash coverage is sorely missed.

2. Channel 7. Can't argue with mid within a top three.

3. Channel 9. Channel 9.
He's not popular.

TV execs are too paranoid to make change and endanger their completely unjustified pay packets.

Ironically if they fired all the old furniture like Karl the savings would be more than enough to boost their pay but that would involve risk and uncertainty and as anyone knows who has been paid far too much for what they do, you don't tell anyone by making yourself visible
My pet gripe was the obsession of 9 FTA showing the diving, for what seemed like half the Olympics. Like seriously there are way more exciting sports they could've shown, like Indoor Volleyball, which in men's or women's form is tops.
Channel 9 was a complete shit show compared with the coverage from Stan and Karl is just an over paid wanker with no real talent or brain
He and Eddy McGuire dead heated for the worst. Tubby Taylor’s diving commentary was a close third, then the break dancing
In my opinion the worse part was the lack of a live bug, the hey had a replay bug but not a love bug... It's really erked me.
I’d add Eddy to that
I only watched the nine Now streaming service, a good selection of live channels ..didn’t watch any of the nine team at all.
Didn’t watch Ch 9 for the reason I don’t want the parochial rubbish. I watched Stan ti get the international feed and coverage, specially on the athletics.
Watched a replay of the Breaking events and granted it's the first time they had such an event. I felt that the music is a big part of Breaking and having to strain my ear just to listen to it when the commentators were not speaking was just frustrating.
Agree with others that the diving commentary was woeful. Isn’t there at least one knowledgeable diving commentator that they could’ve hired ??
I can’t bring myself to respect a man who simps to Anglo Celtic Australians *so* much that he calls himself Stefan-O-vick instead of a more accurate approximation of how Balkan people probably pronounce it.

Have some self-respect mate.
Insane to me that with so much turnover in newsreaders / presenters over the last few years, he still has a spot
Is Layla McKinnon a real woman?
"He is so cringe" "Why is he so popular"

Cringe is an Australian pastime we seem to love it here.
You obviously didn't see the NBC guy in Tahiti for the surfing. Seems like every coverage needs a funny guy these day and most of them are atrocious. The NBC guy was the worst of the worst.
Just use youtube olmypics pages and it cycles thru the highlights without karl
This was why I watched it on Stan. You get the OBS broadcast and commentators, and just tune in or out of whatever sport you want (so no talking heads).
[deleted]
A sizeable proportion of the population are idiots. 
In the famous words of all little kids, 'because'!!
And that was Janja Garnbret who is an absolute monster of that sport. Double gold winner since its inception. The finish was also really tense. Sad they skipped it.
So proud of Osh - no medal but she beat some huge talent to make the finals and has come along in leaps and bounds the last year or so.
Was watching on the app and saw the delayed tv coverage start. Very glad I didnt stop watching on my little phone screen as I would've missed the beast that is Janja!
I watch all the climbing events via the 9now website. Can't trust them to not change to another sport.


They've had 2 goes and still cannot get the camerawork right. Constantly changing to "artistic" shots when there acrion om the wall. Plus the under utilized split screen function. :/


That said, the day when the commentators "took a break" was really enjoyable to watch. LOL.


We need better commentators, better camera work and to split the boulder and lead into their own separate categories.
I'm glad I was watching it on the app. Only knew it was happening thanks to the Olympics subreddit mega thread. Once it was over I went back to the tv for 9 to show McKenzie falling out of the medals.
Duuude I was so pissed off. Tried to change to the dedicated stream but it was already over. Didn't realise the main channel was on delay
"cheer up, at least you're at the Olympics"
Plus one on Dylan Alcott. Not liking him at all.
There was one I saw where this young Aussie athlete has just busted her ass on track, absolutely spent, can barely string a full thought together.

And he just doesn't stop with the questions. Like, how'd it go, how do you feel about the next round? That's fair. But he asked like 5 or 6 dipshit questions, most of which were after she'd made it clear she just wants to get back to the locker room and decompress.
The international commentary was great, it sucked that when catching up we were subjected to 9 commentary. Switched off hockey and a couple of other events purely due to the commentary.
What's wrong with Dylan?

Granted I've barely heard him talk 
Sounds like we're all the way back to Hey Hey its Saturday humour....
Tubby Taylor commentating the diving was worse.

Well actually channel 9s coverage was just shit fullstop. No understanding of the games they were displaying at all.

Like waterpolo. Their highlights package simply showed the goal being scored. But not the 5 seconds of setup which was really more important than the goal itself.

The Olympic feed was so much better. I'd id much rather watch that than anything channel 9 does.

Edit: maybe I should have given tubby more of a chance? The rest of my point about 9 stands though.
He gives me serious dickhead vibes
He is way too casual. Just slouches all the time.
Ticks the boxes though
Shh. You can't say bad things about the abley diverse.
I made it. I made it. I made it. I made it. Yeah I made it. 


Fuck me, get some new lyrics
Omg yes. The same fucking 3 ads, and I still can’t remember for what company they represent.
Trying to watch replays and channel 9 putting in 12 ads.

Also, I’m watching the Olympics - I don’t need to see ads for the Olympic!
"Dux...hot water...built stronger...to last longer!" (x 3)

Anyone watching NBN probably now has that burned into their brains.
 I seriously considered paying for a month of Stan just to avoid it
I used to enjoy watching the best of KS on YouTube, but I can see how him in other contexts, or just too much of him.

It’s probably way past his expiry date now anyway. We end up with these TV dinosaurs so that people just have a face that they know, but surely there are much better interviewers than Eddie mCGuire FFS.
The bogan commentators mentioned Princess Anne was there, but had no idea she was an Olympic equestrian competitor, let alone what her daughter or first husband accomplished.
Don’t know the first thing about equestrian, just wanted to watch some of the dressage, 9 just wanted to have days and days of Olympic golf instead.
Pav doing it was based
Good. Animal abuse shouldn't be in the Olympics anyway.
So glad it's finally okay to loathe Stefanovic. It wasn't so long ago that reddit huffed his farts with Steve Irwin levels of enthusiasm.
Such a dick. Couldn’t believe it when I turned on the olympics and saw him there, did not endear me to the coverage having switched from C7.
How the fuck did he even get any air time seriously. Of course I know the answer - jobs for the boys, every time.
I think both marathons got the global feed and global commentators, not 9 specific.
Gerald Whately kept confusing Versailles and Marseilles during the Men's Marathon.

It was kinda amazing that he made the same mistake about 10 times.
Tony Jones.
> “I’d love to see him nail it. He’d get a lot of points if he nails the dive.”

— Mark “Tubby” Taylor
It was silly but weirdly I came around to him, honestly didn't mind it in the end 
They asked the worst part, not the best part! /s
Oh I thought it was a commentator that just sounded like him.
It was certainly something wasn't it?
Tell me about it. He was totally out of his depth.
Karl during the Opening Ceremony: "It's raining. I must tell you it's raining. It's raining very hard..."
you expect cultured from channel 9? Its SBS and ABC for cultured things.
The inability of many of the commentators to correctly pronounce various French locations - the Seine, Versailles - even Paris got mangled once or twice.

I mean you'd force everyone to spend 30 minutes learning the place names, wouldn't you?
that's the same with every country they set up shop in and broadcast from though.
Didn't watch the opening ceremony but reckon the entire thing should have just been a Daft Punk concert.
Heaps of live sports on their tv app.
Likewise with Alex Lloyd
Golf for hours on end every fucking night on 9Go was ridiculous
Honestly worth every cent.  I was stuck watching the nine morning coverage at a business and it was breathtakingly cringe.  Then again, I dry heave if I hear more than about 30 seconds of any of the morning TV shows, so at least it was consistent with that.
Yeah I watched the whole thing on 9Now, not a horrible Aussie host to be seen, thankfully.
I was surprised by how good Stan’s coverage & interface has been. The occasional glitch but no real complaints on the commentators or coverage. Well worth the $20-22 for the month.
in hindsight i wish i had splurged. I thought i would be able watch everything on 9now but alas not.
He was such a piece of shit about it.

Also hitting on female Olympians inviting them out for a drink with him and the other presenter is creepy as fuck
Fair bit of golf footage.
If Andy is comparison man, Raygun is comparison lady
Well there’s not much point now, the closing ceremony is tonight lol. And of course what does paying for Stan support? Channel 9, who owns Stan
But the diving has Australians who were potential medal chances whereas we were never going to win volleyball
Well tbf almost all the sports (if not all of them) are available on 9Now so can’t really complain about that. I feel like the reason they show diving is that it is one of the more popular sports among the general population plus there are aussies in them. But again, any other sport can be viewed with 9Now.
I love diving, so I thought it was great lol. No matter what sport they decided to show on FTA, someone would be unhappy with it. That’s why it’s great they had all of the sports available to stream on 9now. It’s a shame that not every event has a full replay available though.
Totally agree
They did have Sam Fricker as the secondary commentator and I thought he was pretty good
Hot take on the skateboarding comms. They seem generally loved, including by the skaters themselves
Osh MacSENDzie as one of the spectators nicely wrote on a cardboard. Her improvement since the last Olympic games was impressive. Can't wait to see what she brings to the table in a few years time.
FYI the feed for the sport does not come from Nine. It comes from the Olympic Broadcast Centre.
Pretty much. Karl and the others were even sporting some very humorous green and gold curly wigs.
Except everyone knew it was Hey Hey. The crap 9 put on was idiotic. Why did 9 spend the money?
Totally agree about Tubs. How on earth is he the most qualified person to do that job? There wasn’t an ex diver or similar available? Bet he just hit up his mates at Channel 9 for a free trip to Paris. 

There were some good commentators however - Giann Rooney on the ocean swimming was really informative (actually learned something listening to her) and I always like Liz Chetkovich commentating the olympics.
Tubby was cute as fuck and just seemed like a dad genuinely interested in their kid’s interest. Would unironically love him back for LA. Feel like a commentator with less knowledge can act as proxy for the less knowledgeable viewer when accompanied with a knowledgeable one.
Nope, no where near as bad. His lack of knowledge is irrelevant to me. He is a decent bloke doing the job he was given. Karl is a dickhead with zero redeeming features
After my wife mentioned Tubby’s co-commentators lisp it was all I could hear.
Nah Tubbs is crushing it
Ive met him quite a few times through work, and he is a really nice guy. But I cant stand hearing his voice on TV
Morrison's stooge.
Yes well he’s actually an athlete unlike most of the other knobs
Fuck off. He's an exathlete who fuckin dominated. And if nothing else, he's as passionate about sports as any.
But you were amaaaaazing, we were amaaaazing...
He's one of the most heavily PR flogged people in the country. The Aussie media machine has always been a closed shop, at least since the 90s. They just keep serving us up slop.
how is it animal abuse?
I never liked the guy. He always came across the wrong way, but he was terrible at telling a joke to the Dalai Lama once and suddenly the media made him the best thing ever.
Yeah, I miss the 7 coverage. They were more genuine and more knowledgeable. The commentators were also better
in saying that, least he was overnight unlike Karl
They were different. TV 9 in Sydney had Australian commentators. Online it was UK accents.
You mean Tony "give me a kiss" Jones?
I thought it was madness at first, but came around to thinking it was sheer genius to give Tubby the diving because he brought an everyman feel to a very technical and obscurely detailed sport that two expert commentators would have given a dry and emotionless call.
I couldn’t believe it was him at first but I came around to him. I don’t think he tried to overplay his knowledge and from what I could find out is he spent a lot of time with the Aussie squad to learn about the sport. My only criticisms of him now are he does not have a commentators voice and he did not defer to Fricker as the expert enough.
Happened upon Mark Taylor teamed up with Andy Lee commentating cricket a few years ago. I was doing  building work and Triple M was all I could find. They were actually a terrific team and very entertaining.
Really embarrassing for them. Surely you’d prepare for an important gig like that.
yeah, not everything though. I wanted to watch a particular athlete that i know, but shit out of luck on 9now
They were my favourite commentators the whole games. Significantly pumped up the entertainment level.
Hah that’s great!
Taking bets on them gearing up to revive Hey Hey with Karl?
he put hours of research into the commentary too, learnt all the different dives and was doing live calculations on how much people needed to make the medals. i thought i would hate him but he genuinely was pretty great
Six Olympic teams have been abusing their horses. Not all of this abuse has been at the Olympics though.


Denmark's horses had blue tongues, which they attempted to hide by tightening their nosebands so they couldn't open their mouths. A US horse injured its leg because it didn't want to compete. An Austrian rider struck their horses' shins with a bar. A Brazilian team member used the highly unethical "roolkur" training method that can damage the spine and lead to long term health issues. An Italian rider was eliminated from the Olympics after blood was found in the horses' mouth after competition. Then there's the UK team member who was whipping her horse repeatedly.


How many instances do their need to be before people start to think it's a widespread concern? The fact is that if people can make money out of animals or get fame and glory, the horses' welfare will always come second. The horses don't consent to competing. They have no choice. Some might enjoy it, but clearly from their actions many don't.


https://www.peta.org/blog/olympic-games-equestrian-cruelty/


There's this instance of Australian rider too.


https://www.equestrian.org.au/news/statement-ea-0
Bruce McAveney is an institution and many of the others at seven are also highly experienced. My only issue with them was the 7plus app was very ordinary back in 2021 but I think it’s better now.
Said it in another comment, but I unironically loved it. Thought he was so cute and genuine. Just like me on the couch saying “that’s a nice dive” and “great entry there” as the extent of my analysis
Exactly, and as someone who watches a bit of cricket it also gave a soothing familiarity...
Yeah same. 

From what the person commentating with him said he really put the effort in. Was in constant contact and wanted to learn what he could. He’s not an expert in diving, doesn’t pretend he is, but he really made the effort to give the sport the respect it deserves by those who are commentating on it.
I thought Sam Fricker did really well commentating as well.
Reminds me of watching the big bash a few years ago, and there Andy was running drinks out for the Melbourne Stars.

Dude is living his best life.
I'd much rather that than James Brayshaw who simply screams test match cricket at you like its the final quarter of an afl grand final.
Was that Australian rider in the Olympics? 

I know an Aussie rider pulled out during the team event to prevent a strain turning into an injury to protect the horse, possibly costing a medal but putting the horse first before the medal. 

I’m against horse racing because of the widespread animal abuse and the industry’s failure to get on top of it. But by and large equestrian riders treat the animals with such care and love.
Yeah, miss his commentary. I didn't mind 7plus back then. Stan hasn't been much better. They don't label events properly. Some events are just missing. The highlights selection in the smaller recaps are also poor. Not very user friendly in terms of scrolling too. Terrible considering it's a paid service.
But why do we need that in commentary? Surely the point is to inform viewers of details and context that we wouldn’t otherwise be aware of. I just thought his presence was unnecessary.
yeah, maybe that’s why i liked him, genuinely nice block and sounds familiar
I'm not sure if they were in the Olympics or not. That's all I can find. Unfortunately the media isn't particularly interested in animal abuse in Equestrian, so it's hard to find much information. That doesn't mean it doesn't happen though.
Because an informed commentator can’t always know what the uninformed doesn’t know. Something obvious to them may not be to the layman. And no, it isn’t essential - it was notable in this case because it’s rare
> genuinely nice block

accurate
