
$42.31 per Kg. 🙃

WTF.
Anytime you see "New Look" means they've shrinkfucked it.
What a terrible way to buy chicken.  You know it’s going to be overpriced, and loaded with salt and other preservatives for shelf life.
$42.31 per kg for Chicken? For that price I expect Primo to send me a Butler to hand feed me.
That shit's full of shit you don't need. Read the ingredient list.
Buying chicken breast fillets from the deli and cooking them at home is close to one quarter the price (photo says $42 per kg, and Coles online has chicken breast fillets for $11 per kg right now).

Easiest thing ever, too. Boil a saucepan of water, put the chicken in, turn the stove OFF and come back in 20 minutes. Chop them up or pull apart with two forks. You can put a bay leaf and some peppercorns in the water if you want a little seasoning.
If you buy that crap, you deserve to get got.
Why tf would anyone buy this
Who buys this shit?
Now with less calories!
Coles also usually put the "NEW" sign on it, to make you think it's a new product when it just new packaging.
Everytime there is a packaging change, the product has been altered, usually in weight or quantity.

Case in point: Sakata Rice Crackers are now in a wide (instead of long) package. The weight has dropped from 100gms to 90gms. The price is still the same.

I'm sure that 10gms of rice saved them a fortune! 🙄
Ok
Buy chook, buy slow cooker, put chicken in slow cooker, wait.
The way you have to tear it open from the top annoys me \*greatly\*. It's not resealable packaging either, so we have to put it into a fresh container when we open a new packet.
That's ridiculous cheapest whole chickens sell for $4.50 a kilo.
JBS' Primo Reserve.

They put something in the meat; makes you forget.
It is insanely easy to make, absolute rip.
Make it at home. You don't need to pay that much.
Saying "*Still* out of control" like it's ever stopped?
And now the chicken tastes like dry balls
Anyone who buys this chicken is a war criminal anyway
Damnit I was so happy to see it back but shrinkflation 😭
Who buys this anyway? Precooked chicken in a bad sounds like an invitation for food poisoning.

Edit: just buy a bbq chook for $10-12, eat for dinner and shred the leftovers for lunches.
How is it that we live in a land of farms as far as the eye can see but our population is forced to subsist on this garbage?
$12 for a cooked chook, and that's what, at least 500g of meat?

So this is at least double the price, just so you don't have to pull it apart yourself? Am I missing something here?
Or changed the recipe
>they've shrinkfucked it.

that term beats shrinkflation
Yeah, anyone buying this product even prior to shrinkflation was not doing so to save money.
Don't forget the excessive non-recyclable plastic packaging 😬
Makes KFC look like a healthy bargain.
A lot of the meat they use is not even from Australia 🤮
Even buying a Woolies Chook and stripping the meat is cheaper than this.
Turn off the heat & just let it sit in the hot water?
Lazy method - buy takeaway charcoal chicken, shred, put in whatever you want, still cheaper than $42/kg and you'll get a second meal out of it..
Come on now we can't be advocating for boiled chicken in 2024, give it a dry brine overnight (if you can be fucked it's not make or break, just makes it juicier) and fry it on a saucepan on medium high heat. It's gonna taste infinitely better when all the flavour isn't going into a pot of water. If you're not too scared of some spice, put some smoked paprika, garlic powder and cayenne pepper on it before you fry it.
You actually buy it? Strewth.
> So this is at least double the price, just so you don't have to pull it apart yourself? Am I missing something here?

You are exchanging money for convienience. The same reason why you pay $4 for a coke at the servo vs Colesworth.
You aren’t. People’s laziness knows no bounds, but neither does their ability to complain about the cost of the convinience they want
Got a cooked chook for $7 at Costco today.
Nope you hit the nail on the head
More fillers, less proteins.
"We use high quality ingredients from trusted suppliers across Australia and around the world.."

Its a fucking multinational, [biggest meat processor on the planet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JBS_S.A.). 

100% to be avoided.
My local IGA does rotisserie for about 6.99, these products are luxury bollocks.
Yes. Don't cook multiple large pieces of chicken this way, but a single large chicken breast, butterflied down the middle, will cook perfectly with this method. Turns out succulent as a chinese meal.
Chicken is safe to eat at 60&deg; if you can keep it there all the way through for at least 12 minutes.
Poach it - can do a number of ways.
Frying chicken breast has never worked for me, always dry on the outside and raw in the middle.
Yes, I do buy it, because my daughter has ADHD along with sensory issues around food. This is something she \_will\_ eat, and it's protein which she needs during the school day for her meds to work better.
Haha the cokes are now $4 at Colesworth. Where’ve you been?
Naw, the internal temp of a chicken needs to be at 60 for 35 minutes before it's considered safe. That said, time required reduces as heat increases, so depending non the size of your pot, it might still be okay? 


It's all percentages anyway, but 60 internal is by no means guaranteed safe. 
True, poaching's a good option and is arguably as easy as the boiled method but much juicier
Their method is poaching
You gotta butterfly it brother, cut under the thick parts so you can make one wider thin breast. Makes it much easier to get a consistent cook.
It's commonly bought for camping too. Lots of things you can do with it out there. Chicken or pulled pork wraps are good things.
I am so sorry to learn that, and as one who was a bit on that axis as a child hope she can widen her choices in time. My apologies.
> Haha the cokes are now $4 at Colesworth. Where’ve you been?

Haha! Tbh, I haven't bought Coke since 2019 as I have tried to cut out fizzy drinks out of my diet, so I am a bit out of touch with prices.
Their method is poaching
Yep, and the poaching juice can be used in other recipes. The only time I boil chicken is a whole one as part of chick soup.
A 600ml bottle is now 4.50~ at woolies/coles
> A 600ml bottle is now 4.50~ at woolies/coles

Farrrrkkkkk! I'm not going to even bother thinking about the 7-11s then.
That’s because you want it cold. Electricity costs have gone up a lot.
Sure, show me a 600ml bottle that's on the shelves.
