I learnt to swim in the 80s. My memory is that we did a relatively short period of lessons, six months or maybe less. Then we moved into squad. By third class when we started having swimming carnivals I could swim 50m easily. 

My son is about to turn 10 and has been doing lessons for two years and still can't really swim freestyle. It feels like they intentionally drag it out with endless kicking and breathing stuff and avoid teaching them freestyle. Am I missing something?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
My friend’s kids are much younger (4-6) but they have also been doing lessons for a couple of years and the emphasis is definitely more on safety, water confidence and floating rather than any stroke skills it seems. 

Also I think there are a lot more privately run lessons/ schools that are unconnected to swimming clubs so the option to turn it into sport and join a squad isn’t as direct of a pathway?
Kids swimming lessons are more about teaching them how to survive in a pool rather than swim strokes.
I did school swimming back in the 90s. I didn't learn much more than what your kids have.

I always wondered how other kids in my year were able to compete in the school carnivals when I could barely get through a 50m breaststroke. Turns out they were waking up for 6am squad training before school.
These sorts of questions come under one category - survivorship bias.

Yes you remember kids moving quickly through lessons to squads because that is what you, and other top commenters in this thread, did. You didn't see the kids who couldn't swim, whose parents gave up and moved to something else. You didn't see the kids who had year on year lessons for them to still flounder in the pool.

What you are now seeing is the bits you didn't see before, and wondering why they only exist now, when they always existed. Instructors are still spending time on foundational skills, and skilled kids are moving quickly through to squad, while (thanks to government funding amongst other things) kids who flounder are given more chance to improve their confidence and skill.
It's because they're trying to teach them to swim "perfectly" so that they can progress to competitive swimming. 


When I learnt to swim (even earlier than you!) they just wanted us to be able to swim 50 metres and whether you were breathing properly or not didn't matter that much. Swimming was seen as a survival skill, not a sport.
10 and unable to swim freestyle is definitely a concern. I’d change swim schools.. my five year old can swim freestyle and backstroke better than half the school aged kids in her class.
My eldest is 9 and is being taught strokes, has done freestyle for a year and starting on breaststroke now. She has been going since she was a baby except for covid. We do treat it more like weekly exercise time, so I'm not looking for urgent results.


She does half 25m pool laps. The 5yo is learning freestyle strokes and correct breathing Technique. 


I think they are trying to get the fundamentals right before moving to the next step. Some parents may not like that. But I wish I had that when I was a kid- I just did the normal lessons with school and lots of beach time, so I can 'swim', but my breathing technique is rubbish and my strokes not as effective as they should be, so I'd have low chances trying to swim back to shore after being pulled out by a rip.
I think it's been a long time and you don't have an accurate memory of your early swimming lessons
There are essentially two stages in Australian swimming. Water familiarity and self-rescue, for kids up to 5yo. Then building up skills for efficient swimming, which takes them to about 8-10yo to have a complete set of skills. Then once that is rounded off, building strength and finer skills to a squad entry level. 


It sounds like your child is still at a skill building stage. You'd expect the next step for them to be alternating the arms to the board, getting the breathing working correctly with that. 


Talk to the school about progress. Sometimes kids get stuck and need some focussed attention.


Note that Australian swim schools are very particular about technique. Hardly surprising in a country which has hundreds of Olympic-grade 16yo swimmers.


I am all for this. I do surf life saving and Aussie kids need to be able to be hammered in the surf zone and still do fine because their foundational skills come to the fore over their distress at being knocked about.
No idea - but back when I was growing up, everyone - quite literally, everyone - had a pool or would head to the beach or swimming pool to escape the heat in summer. Along with sunburns and post swim golden gay times - you'd spend so much time in the water that it was inevitable you'd learn to swim well - without needing lessons.
I took my kids to weekly swimming lessons as toddlers and they learnt to float for 20-30 seconds - that’s about it. They then did an intensive 2 week course of daily lessons that lasted 2-3 hours around age 5 or 6 and from that they actually learnt to swim.
Agreed. I’m an older Australian, and not a strong swimmer, but was stunned to see how many high school kids can’t swim an Olympic pool lap in a consistent stroke, they can’t tumble turn, and struggle to tread water. I was in primary school when I went for bronze medallion: didn’t get it, but still.
Not all swim schools are equal. Swam competitively when I was younger and having a pool at home and beach holidays it was extremely important that a. My kids enjoyed swimming and b. They could swim well.

Had my kids both swimming at 6 months, but at around 3yrs of age the lessons seemed to stall in the skills/technique taught, and was dependent on the confidence of the other kids.

Went to two other swim schools before I found one with the philosophy I liked. Daughter (8) has now transitioned to their squad program squad and is doing 3 x 1hr sessions a week averaging around 1.2km a session. Meanwhile many of her primary school classmates are still doing "bubble bubble, breathe" in these shithouse 20 minute 'learn to swim' classes and could barely swim 25m freestyle.

As others have said, find a place that has a squad program and isn't just 'learn to swim' and you'll get better results.
It depends a lot on the curriculum being used: Vicswim is more focused on teaching technique than YMCA, who seem to prioritise survival skills.
I taught swimming lessons for a number of years through a council run swim school. We taught survival, safety and strokes in each level. When the child could achieve certain milestones they’d be assessed and moved up to the next level. Most kids progressed a level every term or so. Once a term there was a lesson where the children wore pyjamas or old clothes over their swimmers and did safety activities.
About 20 years ago people wised up about the amount of backyard pool drownings that were happening. Kids were more likely to drown in a swimming pool when parents weren’t watching then in a public pool, lake or ocean where they got out of their depth. As such a lot of focus and funding went into safety for very young children to learn how to do basic skills to survive a potential drowning. Swimming distances is an important skill for kids to learn, but deaths have been reduced because babies know how to float, toddlers know how to blow bubbles, and 3 year olds know how to kick. 

If you want something specific for your kids I’d recommend looking for something that’s linked to squad, but take the advice from those of us that did squad - there’s no faster way to kill a young swimmers passion.
Couldn't agree more. 7 and 10 year old doing lessons for 2 years and they still can't swim. 

I remember doing a couple of sessions at  a teachers pool and that was it I knew how to swim.
Yes, paying them more money is the missing bit. Everyone is eeking out anything and everything to squeeze the last cent out of every person these days.\
Maybe I’m a little off here seeing as I grew up at the beach and could safely swim in the ocean just a bit after learning to walk; but school sanctioned swimming was something I still did and still learnt from (just started at a higher level than many other kids).
It’s a scam at certain ages. I have a toddler and people are like you should be doing swimming lesson because you have a pool. Or you need to spend time with them blah blah blah.

I tried doing lessons at 7 month old, you  pay $25 to drag them around the pool signing songs, he hated it. I spend heaps of time with the him at the park, drawing and reading to him. Don’t need swimming lesson to connect with him.

He will learn to swim, just not when he can’t even talk and express what he wants.
You need to send them to a swimming school operated by a swimming club. The private and Council operators are generally just focused on water safety not developing stroke technique.
I don’t remember it being that quick but your son’s situation does seem slow. But then 8 is pretty late to start as well. Definitely squad is not for a few years
Had you checked what they offered? My kid is 10 and can freestyle, backstroke, breaststroke 50m at his swim school which is a large Sydney wide organisation with at least 15-20 schools. Can tumble turn, tumble turn from freestyle to backstroke. And this is not squad, just their progressive program from toddler, learn to swim, stroke development.

This particular class refines the freestyle, breaststroke and butterfly is built up.
Same. I've known how to swim as long as I can remember. I didn't have access to a private pool or anything. My son is 10 and has been in swim lessons at 2 diff places for 6 years, on and off. I finally cracked it and paid for private swim lessons because after 4 years and thousands of dollars he didn't know how to TREAD WATER. Apparently that's taught in a higher lesson. Absolutely ridiculous.
It's an open secret, for as much we pride ourselves on swimming our average standard is slipping dramatically.

*"Royal Life Saving Society Australia (RLSSA) estimates 83 per cent of 12-year-olds cannot tread water for two minutes. And 40 per cent cannot freestyle or backstroke for 50 metres or even dog paddle 25 metres."* (Ref 1, early this year)  
  
And this isn't new, from 2014 (Ref 2):  
*Three out of five children are leaving primary school without the ability to swim to basic standards, which Lifesaving Victoria fears could lead to higher drowning rates in the future.*

*Research reveals that 60 per cent of children aged under 12 cannot swim 50 metres without assistance or stay afloat for two minutes, the yardstick used to determined standards*.

And despite all the increased effort being placed on safety, the actual rates of drowning for children 5-14 haven't improved at all (Ref 3, Page 5, but lots of good data). 

If you cannot tread water, can you really swim? How do we define swim, for some it's simply playing around in a shallow pool for a little bit then rest on the sides. If the rate of swimming ability is down, the rates of drowning will never improve. We currently have a lot of alarmism around water safety and I think we're sort of losing the plot over focusing on these tiny details from how towels are wrapped, to swimsuit colour etc. When really we just need to triple down on making sure kids know how to swim, and can do so to a good standard.

Bring the price down, govt should pay whatever they need to. And perhaps cool down on all the pool closures, because they're no longer up to a modern standard. It's a pool, it doesn't need to be complicated.



  
Ref 1 -> [Most of our children cannot swim to save themselves (smh.com.au)](https://www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/most-of-our-children-cannot-swim-to-save-themselves-20240110-p5ew9j.html)

Ref 2 -> [Three out five children leaving primary school can't swim shock statistics reveal (theage.com.au)](https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/three-out-five-children-leaving-primary-school-cant-swim-shock-statistics-reveal-20141218-129udu.html) 

Ref 3 -> [RLS\_ChildDrowningReport2022\_SPG.pdf (royallifesaving.com.au)](https://www.royallifesaving.com.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/65269/RLS_ChildDrowningReport2022_SPG.pdf)
Teach your kid to swim
Ex instructor here. Some kids suck at swimming and some swimming schools suck. I taught kids to swim for about 5 years and have been swimming my entire life. Some kids don’t listen, don’t try, are too scared to relax and get in the right position, some have weird bodies that sink really easily, other kids take literal years until the movements click in their mind. Not all teachers work well with all types of kids, some schools are very rigid about lesson plans. Some schools in looking for perfect technique take forever to teach your kid the base level swimming abilities because they need perfection of the previous steps. I have worked for these schools and it fucking sucks! You have a class of kids and you can’t deviate from the lesson plan to actually help the kids progress. My advice is to change schools, they obviously aren’t giving you what you want so move.
Kick is fundamental to freestyle. If a kid can't kick properly they will struggle learning the rest of it. They'll get there eventually, but it's a lot of going backwards to step forwards. It's much smoother and their technique benefits significantly from focusing on kicking, then breathing and arms before moving on to proper freestyle. I was a childhood state champ and then went into teaching and coaching swimming in my 20s. I swam with a lot of kids in squads who had terrible technique despite having the strength to go fast. They were all faster than me until I got stronger, and then I left them for dead. At high levels of competition, strength and fitness alone no longer cuts it.  It's difficult to correct technique once kids are comfortable with the way they swim. Good kick technique allows kids to be able to do the breathing and arms properly in freestyle. So many stop kicking to breathe and then sink. Then they lose their catch and they lose their race. Even in the squads I was in, with swimmers competing at nationals, we did kick sets almost every day.
Most of these answers are wrong.

The whole idea of these modern swim schools is to keep them in the school for as long as possible between the ages of 0 and 10.

As a parent who has had three kids in this system, it took me about 10 years to realise this. 20 odd levels, supervisor approval for them to move on. It's all about keeping that weekly direct debit flowing.

I actually think it's almost harmful to keep them in that long.
i have noticed the same thing with my son. unsure why.
idk w the swimming school stuff but I went to the beach today and did my first ocean swim in years. just jumped in and swam 1 k each way. fucking magic. 2 small sharks, a snapper, heaps of trivially, some tailor , a school of bait fish, a stingray, 2 big grouper, a cormarant, blackfish , wrasse, rock cod and a healthy work out.

  
if u can get out there.
I exercise at a gym overlooking the swimming lessons run by the schools and I do see them being taught overarm. But they're not very good; possibly too young in primary school? 

I suggest you get your son a couple of private lessons to refine his technique as he's probably on the cusp of getting it and just needs some individual attention.
No idea but my kid is 12 and has done lessons off and on since he was 3 and still can’t swill the length of the pool. I give up. His latest lessons were still in the kiddie pool in a 10m lane. I don’t get it.
I’m suprised it is progressing slowly for that age.
About 20 years ago in the Sutherland Shire Leisure Centre swimming schools they would focus heavily on strokes after basic skills were done. All about mastering and moving on.

Is this not done anymore?
Why don’t you teach your kids yourself? Them and you learn, you spend precious time with them, you know their swimming limits and you end up having fun with them, although id say I didn’t have fun learning to swim as our swimming lessons were dad would throw me in the river and told to swim against the current, still learnt really fast
Ex-swimming instructor from WA here. Our levels go 1. learn to breathe and float and be comfortable in water, 2. learn to kick, 3. Learn freestyle (and backstroke and breaststroke). 

If your kid is stuck on the breathing and kicking stage, maybe he needs to learn how to kick. It is a super important skill.
My 4 year old daughter does swimming lessons owned and operated by the council and they mainly teach her what to do in a situation if she was to fall in a pool without an adult. Stuff like keeping afloat, paddling and kicking with your head underwater and how to turn around underwater and swim back to the wall so she can pull herself up and out.

I'm guessing freestyle comes after she's confident or ill probably teach her some things along the way. 

It was definitely different with me growing up (90s kid) it was more about freestyle but now I think they mainly emphasize on pool safety.
If you want your kid to do squad then expect lessons for years. 

I didn’t care about perfect freestyle, I wanted them to not drown. We did a couple of years of lessons, got them to the point they could swim 50m reasonably, find the wall if they fell in, float, tread water, dive to the bottom of the pool and collect a toy. That was enough for us, none of them showed any inclination for Olympic swimming so I called it done mostly. We did do one-week intensives in the school holidays right before the school swimming carnival each year as a refresher.
Yep. Eventually pulled my kid out coz it had been like two years and they wouldn’t even progress her to the next level. She can “swim” well enough to not drown but will probably never get any better
When my Stepdaughter was 7 she got graded in the lowest group at a school swim assessment so I realised she was behind her peers. Her lessons got screwed up during covid etc etc. So I changed swim schools and rescheduled her lesson to a day where I didn't have to rely on my partners ex (who used to let her skip lessons if she cbf going). I also put her in swim intensive classes during school holidays. She was doing 2 lessons per week for a while. We also did year round lessons. When I was a kid, we only did summer lessons. I was a decent swimmer myself and only stopped when I reached squad at about 11/12.


The amount of progress she made in the first year was amazing. Her confidence was massively improved. She's now 9 and can do freestyle, backstroke, breaststroke. She actually has a nice freestyle stroke. She can now enjoy the whole backyard pool, even when out of her depth. Whereas that first year I had to teach her how to duck dive to get an object from the bottom of the pool. And she wouldn't leave the shallow end.


We let her quit recently bc she wasn't enjoying it anymore, they were only doing prep for squad which she wasn't interested in. So we are satisfied that she is safe and skilled enough.


I'm pregnant and my baby will be starting at the same school at 6 months for water familiarisation and then survival skills.
I’m with you on this! I learned to swim way back too, and it felt like we were swimming laps before we even knew it! Maybe the focus is more on technique and safety these days, but it does seem like it’s taking longer to get to the fun stuff. Time to ask if there’s a secret recipe for freestyle they’re not sharing
Depends which swim school you go to. I used to teach at one about 15 years ago and I had 6-7 yr olds doing freestyle. iirc I also had them doing breastroke and backstroke, or maybe that was my 8 yr olds. 

But this was a squad oriented school - the 14 yr olds were swimming km's. I also taught swimming programs elsewhere that were way more safety and fun oriented.
This is exactly what occurred with my son at same age. I spent thousands of dollars and this was a local council indoor ‘leisure centre’ that had a gym also. Swim teacher was excellent but structure of program wasn’t effective; no timelines/goals, etc. It seemed that it was geared around the Centre retaining the ‘client’ only.
Bloody kids are all sooks thease days, thats the bloody problem, it's not their fault but, slack ass teachers give them a bloody pat on the back for just showing up. 

WTF is a participation award! 

Back in my day, the dads just chucked us off a jetty in the river and yelled "swim ya little shits, swim". I new 3 kids that drowned in my class, but that's was the beauty of the system back then, they were probably retards that would of grown up to be "progressive" or something, survival of the fittest it's done us well for the last 200000 years.
At my daughters swim school I was shocked to recently learn they have a separate class for diving lessons! Like shouldn't learning to dive be a part of the swimming lesson? Apparently not!
They tried to teach me to swim in the 90s. It was more focused on diving to the bottom and coming back up or using the kickboard. Teachers even used to give me lollies for doing this.

So all I learnt was try something and get free lollies. Still can’t swim.
What stage is he in?

My son is 8 and it took 2 years for him to go from stage 3 to 4, which I think is freestyle 5m, to freestyle 10m and backstroke 5m. I can tell he will probably be in stage 4 for another two years. School carnival competitive entry is stage 5 and above requirement.

I thought it was quite slow development, so I emailed the swim school, and the supervisor instructor sat with me for a 15-minute chat while we observed his lesson. It is worth contacting them for a discussion I reckon; and if it's still sus after that, then change schools. 

Idk if this is relevant, but i had noticed that parents take their kids for a little swim prior to the lesson. So I trialled it with my own son and it seemed to help him get into a focused state at the start if lessons.

Edit: https://www.education.wa.edu.au/vacswim-swimming-stages-and-awards
Rather than guess I though I'd better just look it up.
My parents taught me to swim (the same as everyone I know) by the time we hit 1st grade, swimming lessons were pretty much teaching safety, rescue stuff (throwing people floating things etc) anyone lacking got some extra training but it really didn't take long for them to catch up.
Depending on your state try Auswim, i learnt to swim through the same program in the 90s. its a week intensive in school holidays. We live remote and don’t have access to swim lessons and i was really concerned that my 4 yr old hadn’t had any seeing relatives and friends take theirs since very small babies. After a week my child had progressed so much it was unbelievable:
They only promote you to more advance techniques after you prove you are competent in that current skill.
I used to race at a high level, but life and so on has kicked in and so I put my kids through lessons. 

8 kids in a 30 minute class means < 4 minutes coaching per kid per class. There’s no chance for them to learn.
*Two years*?

  I remember doing swimming lessons at 10 years old (late 90's), I wasn't the most confident yet by the end of the year I was doing freestyle up the length of the pool + various strokes. The instructor was super chill, had a great strategy to ease all of us into new things- Doing backstroke while gripping a mini body board to stay afloat while learning technique and stuff like that.
I remember swimming lessons in school. But I also remember we all started as tadpoles. Then as you achieved things you moved up to other groups like frogs, jelly fish, sharks etc. I remember 4 years in I got to be a shark. My friend was still a tadpole, but also faffed about every class and never really paid much attention.
I’ve been to two groups
- first one was blue fit. Pretty useless. Kid wasn’t progressing  (3-4yo) and it was basically 30min daycare in the pool
- second was Carlisle. Only been there a few months and he’s now practising freestyle, backstroke and breathing and can swim about 25m unaided.

We now swim together at the local beach between the buoys - approx 100m before we take a break (he uses a snorkel so that he can keep up and keep swimming).
I won a swimming cup at my first year of high school. admittedly it was the Cabbage Cup but it was shiny AF. 

I'm a fucking terrible swimmer but I'm better than my dog and I can keep myself alive and I also supervise all my friends kids at their pools and it's not like I'm ever going to be on Asians Drowning aka Bondi Rescue. 

Winning a swimming race is not a reflection on how good you are around water.
My swim coach in the 80s was Laurie Lawrence before he was famous. We were on the kick boards for a few lessons only the on to freestyle very soon after.
You should take him swimming a few times on top of it to teach him some more. I never had lessons, just a summer of going to the pools with my old man. Took me no time at all. I’m sure with the water skills he’s learnt at swimming lessons it’d take no time for him too
I did swimming lessons through out the 00’s and 10’s. It was doggy paddle, diving and then swimming laps (free and back mostly but as you move up, breast as well) and I think it they were 30 minute lessons. I stopped once I hit comp level and needed flippers and I just hit an age, I didn’t care anymore I could swim that was enough. 

My brother struggled with the laps, he’s brain wouldn’t connect with his arms and legs to do it all together so once covid hit, he stopped because it wasn’t worth it. He can swim to save himself and that’s enough.


I think it’s good to remember that some people just can’t do swim strokes and that’s okay, being able to kick and doggy paddle is the most important I’d say
I have just pulled my 5yo out of swimclass after 2 years as he made little or no progression for months. He started to hate the pool and as he is tall for his age he was getting really bored kicking across an eight meter strech of 90cm deep water. He has never been scared around water and has been floating correctly for over a year now. Id rather spend the $20 a week for 30min class (where hes only ever up to 11 min actually in the water) on pool time with him. Ill teach him myself as these professionals aren't teaching him anything.
My parents made me do weekly swimming lessons from about age 5 until I finished high school. By that age it was more about life saving and first aid skills, swimming laps and sometimes giving stuff a go - we tried under water hockey and water polo. This was at a public council pool. Worth noting also that I was taken to the beach from about 3 months of age and spent a couple of weeks every summer camping by the beach (with most days spent at the beach all day). Squad was an option but it was way more intense - several mornings a week iirc and not something we wanted to do. 

My kids started swimming lessons at 6 months old at the local council pool. And it was a lot of water safety stuff and getting comfortable in water but I think it was good. My eldest is 8 now and he is a water baby - it’s his happy place. He definitely can swim freestyle, backstroke, breaststroke and survival backstroke, though not a whole lap before touching the bottom yet. I notice they didn’t really start teaching him to turn his head to breathe until just recently. He is improving all the time. My youngest is 6, he was more apprehensive about water (would refuse to put his face in) but has come a long way. He can do freestyle (stands up to breathe or lifts his head straight up) and kicks on his back with a kick board.  

I’m thinking of enrolling my eldest in nippers, and there is a minimum distance he needs to be able to swim, from memory about 25m any stroke. I think he will be able to do that. I need to ask his swimming teacher and probably do some practise with him outside of lessons.  

But there is no rush as far as I’m concerned, just trying to be consistent going every week and keep it fun (they both have a swim after their lesson and love doing bombies and diving for sinkies).
Fun fact. Freestyle isn't actually a swimming stroke. What you're thinking of is Australian crawl.
Nobody ever learned swimming in lessons. These are just for teachers to see how far the kids are and admonish the parents to get it together. Then parents usually pay attention to actually spend time with their kids at the local pool and teach them. 


Next you will complain about school not teaching kids to go to the toilet... wait. That's currently happening in Switzerland!
My kids spent 2 years learning to swim from the age of 3. They were legal in all strokes by the time the finishes. 1 30 minute lesson  a week. We would also take them to the pool ~2 times a week to practice / mess around. 

During this time we had some great teachers and poor teachers. We also had to advocate for the kids when the teachers seemed to be slacking off.  Both kids placed within the top 10 for state competitions.
I learnt to swim in the late 80’s & early 90’s. I could swim okay by grade 4 or 5, enough to do 25m at the swim carnival, but I didn’t make it to the squad until grade 6.
Former swim instructor - breath work and kicking are fundamentally important skills. Learning to stay alive in the water and being comfortable is the outcome, not learning freestyle. 

Not being disrespectful however if your child only starting swimming at age 8 this is why they are behind a bit. Most kids i worked with were starting at 1 year old or so,  "bubble, bubble, breathe"
It depends where you’re doing lessons. There are still places like you experienced.  I recommend changing venues.
Need to put him in the surf with you supervising and between the flags, learn proper survival skills but in a safe manner. I regard myself as a crappy swimmer, but I bet I could swim/float for 24 hours because I was in the surf every summer.
They focus too much on the perfect stroke, rather than getting from the deep end to the shallow end.
Btw freestyle is not what you maybe think it is. I’m guessing you are talking about front crawl! In a race freestyle allows you to swim any stoke but most people swim front crawl. But freestyle itself is not a swim stroke. 

But yes like many things these days it all about making money so yes it gets dragged on a bit.
This might be it. The learn to swim I did was attached to the squad. So there was incentives for them to transition us.
I'd argue learning to dive, tread water for X minutes and do butterfly to the edge of the pool teaches kids how to survive **+** swim well.
[deleted]
I agree. Just like most "back in my day" questions , survivorship bias is usually the answer.
Can confirm! I was one of those kids that floundered in the same low-level groups for years. 🤣 I never quite grasped the proper strokes or techniques that would have gotten me into the higher-level groups, but I could tread water for hours and mastered the survival backstroke, so I was pretty proud of what I *could* do, tbh. I didn't really give a crap about joining a swim team or whatever. I just wanted to survive for the longest time possible if I fell off a boat. lol
You know I think you're somewhat right. 

My kid started with a 'private' swim school, and it was much more 'do everything' 

But now she's in the swim class at one of the aquatic centres. It's much more 'learn this skill first' and each group is based on skills learnt instead, and until that particular skill is done, you don't move to the next one. 

I can see benefit of both though. And my daughter loves it either way
Hey ex swimming instructor/ lifeguard. You can survive much longer if you swim properly, just throwing it out there.
Agreed.  My 9 year old can freestyle, breast stroke, backstroke, and is learning butterfly.  Weekly swimming lessons at a local pool.  Nothing special.  Consistency is key to progressing through the levels 

Swim schools are more focused on technique.  My rule was that swim lessons were compulsory until you got the basic ability to swim a few laps of the pool.  After that is the childs choice to continue.  

School swimming is much more safety focused.  

Lots of kids don't do it cause it is expensive.
Agree, my 5 year old can swim at least 12m freestyle unassisted (half the pool length). They've been taught technique using kickboards and flippers, and then gradually decrease the use of them.
Freestyle means you can do any stroke.  You mean Australian Crawl.
>I can 'swim', but my breathing technique is rubbish and my strokes not as effective as they should be

Same. I should really do some stroke correction lessons
Queenslander?
Cos teaching a 6 year old and a 2 year old toddler is the same thing right?
This is quite simply explained by tbe frequency of lessons. Once a week kids forget a lot in the time between lessons, especially if they're not practising their skills in that time. Daily, they retain more from the previous lesson as it's only been 24hrs, you spend less time relearning the skills from the previous lessons and can spend more time on teaching the next progression of that skill
Who gives a shit about tumble turns? Not relevant to the 99% of us who swim to not die or for recreation.
Um...wouldn't the fact that you aren't a strong swimmer indicate  that the way you were taught how to swim maybe wasn't the best method?

I'd rather be a strong swimmer with a rubbish technique, than a weak swimmer with a great technique.
As a competitive swimmer and former teacher/coach- toddler sessions aren’t so much about bonding, as about the baby learning a feel for the water. If kids don’t get in water that young it can be very difficult to teach them when they’re older, and their progress can be slow. The lessons aren’t strictly necessary but if you’re not paying for lessons at least get the kid in the pool with you so they can figure out what moving in water is like nice and early. 

Re them hating it, well, it’s a skill they need to learn.
In other words, all kids learn at their own pace.
The baby and toddler lessons are about getting them confident in putting their head under water so that they can be swimming by the time they're 4 or 5. It's amazing to see how well a 5 year old can swim with regular professional lessons. Kids will of course catch up eventually but my kid and his friends who have been learning since they were babies are waaaaay more confident in the water than their peers who haven't. The kids who've had lessons are also a lot safer around water because they've had it drilled into them by their teachers from a young age. Even if you don't see the value in lessons for your child they are definitely not a scam.
>I tried doing lessons at 7 month old, you pay $25 to drag them around the pool signing songs

I'm no baby expert, but what were you expecting out of a swim class for a 7 month old baby? They are hardly going to be teaching the baby breaststroke or doing breathing exercises.
We have a pool. Approx 30 years ago my child started lessons at 12 months old, they would not start them any earlier. They learnt to turn over, get to the side of the pool, blow bubbles and get out. Next stage they learnt dog paddle, then freestyle and back stroke. They stopped at age 5 as the school they went to had a pool and swim and they had intensive swimming in summer each year of primary school and did swim to survive. There was also a squad attached to the school but my child was not interested.
Our swim school progress' kids through the skills once they show they are competent. I thought all schools operated this way? If you are stuck on the basics, you wont progress to learning different strokes.
When I was a kid, learning to tread water and swim with clothes on were for the higher levels too! I used to get *told off* by my swimming instructor for treading water because I "wasn't ready for that yet" (even though I *knew* I could tread water for over 2 hours because I lived near a damn lake!) 

It's crazy to me that the situations that are more likely to happen to people near water (e.g. falling into water with clothes on and needing to stay afloat for an extended period of time) were blocked off as something only the "advanced swimmers" could learn.
Mate, you’re wrong. Most of these answers have given actual reasons as to why it takes time. You’ve just assumed the worst and decided you know better than everyone else.

I’m an instructor. I don’t care about the money. I can assure you my boss doesn’t either (at least she genuinely wants the best experience for the kids), but let’s focus on an instructor’s perspective.

We have less than ten levels, and half of those are in the baby pool before they’re even four years old. We move them up when they have the necessary strength and the technique to swim at the next level. Each level increases the amount of laps swam at a time, so this is required. The point is to have every kid in a class at the same level.

I have no idea what you mean by it being harmful to keep them in. Although I assume you mean it’s harmful to keep them in as long as possible to maximise profit, which is not what is happening.

Different kids will take different lengths of time to learn. We’re not going to move them up if they’re not ready.

Maybe instead of assuming the worst and dismissing everyone else’s thoughtful arguments, you should use this thread to better inform yourself.

If you are interested in understanding the levels and requirements for moving up, I am happy to explain how it works at the pool I work at.
Totally agree!!
nah I was in squad by year 2. I remember the first day I hit 20 laps.
Nope, I was able to swim around 1000m by the end of the summer between year 2 and 3 (age 7). I remember being in lessons around 4 and HATING it, but we kept going to lessons every summer and I could dog paddle and stay afloat well enough that I wouldn’t drown. The summer before year 3 mum took us to the pool almost every day of the summer holidays and something finally clicked and suddenly I could swim (I was 7 going on 8 at the time). There was a Commonwealth Games on TV around that time and I started swimming laps because I’d been watching the pros doing it and was inspired. At the school swimming carnival a few weeks later I won every race I entered.
Diving like- entering the water or diving, like, the sport of diving? They are not the same thing.
It is about doing it perfectly. My daughter is about to turn 6 and has been in lessons since she was 3. They start learning to float and be confident in the water then move onto proper front and back kicking. Once that is done to a suitable level they move onto freestyle and beginning backstroke. Then breast stroke and butterfly kicking and once they have picked up all four strokes start on building up distance and strength. At the moment she is at the 20m freestyle, 20m backstroke and learning breast stroke and butterfly kicking with her almost through to learning the arms for butterfly and breast stroke. The next youngest child in the 20m section is an almost 8 year old. Each step has to be at a suitable level. These aren't simply you can swim 50m with some kind of form and done. When they are doing 50m they are doing it perfectly. These are about churning out competitive swimmers for those that can make it through.
I agree that spending more time in the water is key to learning how to be safe in the water but plenty of parents are not equipped to teach their kids that. I know I am not - I can look after myself in the water but I am not confident I can teach my kid. I plan to enrol him in nippers when he's old enough too because I know full well I am not capable of teaching him ocean safety to the extent that he may need it. But I am happy to and will take him swimming as often as we can to get him used to the water and using his skills outside of lessons.
A lot of these privately run swim schools are incentivised to retain your kid for as long as possible and not loose them to a squad.   There, I said it.

My kids went to a local Y with a solid swim club, so they had the option.
My son is turning 3 in a few months and can almost swim without my assistance. Still wouldn't trust him to not be there, but I think it's just a case of each to their own.

I had a friend who couldn't swim, and his father was a swimming instructor.
That’s one thing but they teach so much more now, particularly for toddlers. They teach kids to not be afraid of water. To not panic when splashed in the face. To learn what to do if they are pushed or pulled into a pool unexpectedly. How to come back up to the surface if they are pushed under. How to find the edge of the pool and move towards it however they can. How to float calmly on their back if that’s all they can do in the moment. They have regular pajama days where the kids learn how to swim in heavy clothing.
Cheap?! Where do your kids learn to swim?
It’s not a lifesaver it’s a swim instructor that costs several hundred dollars for classes for one child for one year. And we are also on the sidelines watching.
I don't know about your swim lessons, but all the ones where I am need carers to be at the pool unless the kids are like, teenagers.
The Olympics swimming commentators (former champion) on one of the networks said recently “to parents listening, the most important thing your kid can do when they’re younger is learn technique. It prevents injuries and helps them swim faster when they’re older and competing”. That got me thinking. I guess this is the point of the endless technique building rather than distance / stroke swimming?
Our rule is you stay in swimming lessons until you reach squads.
This is r/Australia, it's just called freestyle in Australia, not Australian crawl, or crawl.

Free style, as a choice in a swimming race, is not really a thing once you get out of kindy.
Thank you!!!!
I'm 42, a lifelong qlder, raised in the north... And I can't swim for shit 😅 I did swim a few times a week for a period as an adult, the lifey spent the first six months pacing me beside the pool with a kickboard in his hand, waiting to see if I was about to drown 😂
Kids don’t need to learn tumble turns. But you can only perform them when you are a certain level of competent in the water- you need to be able to position yourself. So whilst I agree that kids don’t need to learn them, I think kids should be competent enough in the water to be capable of doing them.
Was at a high school swimming carnival
Ouch. That seemed to hit a nerve.
Like I said, I have my own pool. We do our own sessions in that and he absolutely loves it.
I agree. My kid at age 3 literally sank to the bottom of the pool - totally helpless when they fell in and had to be scooped out. Of course this freaked me out, since their peer who is 6 months older was confidently swimming and splashing about. I immediately enrolled my kid into the same swim school and within a few months of half hour weekly lessons my kid was dog paddling to the wall and able to hold breath for 10 seconds. After 12 months, we had a total fish who was amazing. Still couldn’t do the freestyle breath but happily doing the strokes. Learnt important survival skills, rules about no running around pool, sun safety - you name it. It’s absolutely essential for kids these days especially in warmer climate areas.
I was a swimming instructor too, the worst part about teaching kids to swim is the parents. Everyone thinks their kid is the only one in the class and they have no clue the damage pushing a kid too far too quickly can do. They also have no idea what correct technique looks like. Our classes were always fully booked out we didn’t need long term customers, but swimming is not something that is learnt overnight
For most really young kids (under 3/4 yrs old) weekly lessons do seem like a waste. They just don't understand enough to really learn to do much other than get used to being in water. 

Getting used to water gets a bit repetitive after a few weeks/months and could give the impression that the swim school is just trying to make money. 

For kids older than that, I agree they're not (IME) just trying to keep you around to make money, but progression really depends on the type of child. Some progress very quickly because they're willing to listen to the instructor and try to do new things when they're told/shown. Others just seem to be retards (as put by my boss when I used to teach). 

In the OPs case, I'd guess the kid probably isn't particularly good at listening... Starting at 8 very likely didn't help given most kids can swim decently by then. Also having that extra strength from being older means you don't need as much technique which might explain why the kid looks like a fish out of water.
If that's genuinely what happens at the school you instruct at, I'm delighted. I can assure you that is not the case at the schools we have been to or that most parents we discuss this with have been to.

We did the right thing as parents and took them to swim school as soon as we could. Under 3 or 4 years of age, depending on the child, I'd absolutely agree with your assertions.

Past that, though, at least for our children, they were swimming laps of their grandparents' pool with confidence and spending hours in the pool on weekends perfectly safely with supervision. Yet not progressing through classes. The number of times I also heard, yes, they're ready, but we don't have a place in the next class available was greater than 1.

It's frustrating for parents. Particularly because we remember attending classes for a year or two and being perfectly capable swimmers. 

Maybe your school IS different, as I said, but that's not the experience of most parents I know.
Wow that's advanced!
Like entering the water diving. My kid is not taught in her swimming lesson to dive into the water, literally just to swim. It only took me 3 years to learn this when I realised she couldn't dive into the water
In Australia?
On this point. My kid is 6, and being taught how to save someone’s life in the water. My kid is a shark in the water. He has been going swimming since he was 6 months old with a swim to survive school.
Ocean
[deleted]
It makes sense too, cause in Australia, we don't really stop swimming lessons till much later.  So we have the opportunity to learn to swim properly than needing to cram learning into only a few lessons
It's about the last lesson level before squad that I have been confident in their abilities lol
The swimming competition rules define freestyle as anything which is not walking or diving (or in a medley event, one of the medley strokes). But if you think any Australian coach is going to train anything but the fastest stroke when given a choice :-) 


Technically, what us Australians call 'freestyle' isn't the Australian Crawl stroke (the modern approach has a faster slightly different kick, and the location of the breath has been optimised). Which is why the name fell out of use.
I have no issue swimming in water, out in the ocean (jumping off a boat I mean), and so on, but I couldn't turn without water going up my nose to save my life.


I get your point, but it's also a weird link that assumes everyone follows a path that includes certain skills and if they don't get to that skill they haven't learnt other stuff 
You actually didn’t say anything about having your own pool.
100%
I understand it can be frustrating when your kid has been in the same level for over a year, but moving them up isn’t going to magically give them the strength and the technique. They’re just going to hate going to lessons.

Everyone’s classes are always fully booked so if a parent doesn’t think lessons are worth continuing then maybe it’s a good idea for their child to stop doing lessons so someone else can take their place. Unless of course their child still wants to swim.

Another thing is that some people seem to think that lessons are the only way to swim. If a child is competent in the water then they can just go to a pool during the holidays and play around with friends. Once a child is at the point where they are safe in the water, then lessons are only necessary if they want to swim as a sport.
We’ve been taking my 2 year old since she was 6 months old and she picks up something new every week. Both in swim safety and in initial swimming techniques like bubble blowing, paddling and kicking and maintaining posture. At this age toddlers are all about trying to understand how to master skills so it’s actually a great time for them to skill up after the initial infant years of developing a sense of safety in the water.
Swimming Instructor 30yrs experience, there's a difference between being able to swim with correct technique, and being able to "swim laps of their Grandparent's pool"

It sounds like your kids know how to swim given they are confident in the water, but don't have correct technique, which is why they aren't progressing through levels.

When swimming outside of lessons, I can guarantee your kids aren't using the correct technique, but whatever works for them. If you practise it wrong, it's really hard to break those habits, especially when we're only spending 30min with them each week 

What practise other than recreational swimming during summer, on weekends, did you do with your kids? If you sent them to school once a week for 30min how much do you think they'd learn, let alone retain?

This is not having a go at you for doing the wrong thing, but most parents seem to not understand that without your help outside of the 30min we see them, there's only so much we can do. Also, kids tend to muck around in class, especially if the 30min lesson is the only time they get in a pool (esp. if they can't swim before or after lessons). Much of what we do is class control, again parents need to be involved so everyone is working together

Also pays to think about what you consider the goal of learning to swim. Do you want your kids to be able to swim without floaties, or be doing laps and winning swimming races? Is it you have to complete X stage and then you consider they've "learnt to swim"

Sounds like your kids know how to swim enough that you don't feel anxious if and when they are around water - that's a win, and should be considered a pass. Swimming isn't easy for everyone, some kids naturally streamline in the water and progress quickly, until size/strength sees them stagnate. Kids who struggle to float, stuggle to swim correctly, and always will.
I definitely understand the frustration of when a kid’s ready to move up but there aren’t any places. Unfortunately, there just aren’t enough swim schools around, and the one’s that are, are understaffed. The pool I teach at is always fully booked and we’re always looking for new instructors. Once again though, that’s not the owners trying to make money, it is a genuine issue at every pool.

As for your quick experience learning, there are many reasons for that. Yes, after a year or two you can be a capable swimmer. However, the levels don’t correspond to capability or confidence, but rather technique and strength. If a kid is a perfectly capable swimmer, then they don’t need to do the next three or four levels, those are just for kids who want to swim or do it as a sport.

It’s entirely possible you became an expert swimmer after a couple of years, but that’s just not the case for the majority of children. And again, it’s not just about being able to swim a couple of laps, we move them up based on technique.

But at the start of your original comment you said all of this is wrong, so you’re probably not going to listen anyway.
I was in a swimming club from age 5 but that was like 30 meter laps but yeh every sat morning for half the year I was at the pool
Has she been taught different safe entry techniques? There’s very few situations where someone should be diving into water, swim schools generally focus on what they call safe entries unless the kids are swimming laps/heading towards competitive swimming.
Not OP but my kids go to the local Y that has both swim school and squad in Australia
We only started swimming lessons this year (Covid, moving and waitlists kept us delaying) and I so happy with how confident my 6 and 3 year olds are in the pool already. They can’t swim laps but they aren’t scared or panicked at all.
You know swimming lessons are half an hour right? I can’t fit a work day into a swimming lesson.
You still have duty of care for your kids while they're at a lesson, you can't drop and run.
I will also say, we NEED to learn to do it properly in Australia, if you get caught by a rip at the beach it is a life and death matter very quickly and the energy you save from swimming properly can easily save your life.
My rule was when you get a bronze medallion we will discuss this. All three got this, one is enrolled to renew so they can work at the aquatic Centre this summer. 
When they apply for jobs many employers look at it as a positive
Exactly this, thanks
Surprise
Exactly!

As I said in another comment, “some people seem to think that lessons are the only way to swim. If a child is competent in the water then they can just go to a pool during the holidays and play around with friends. Once a child is at the point where they are safe in the water, then lessons are only necessary if they want to swim as a sport.”

There seems to be a massive misunderstanding among some parents about what the lessons are for. It’s not like school; you don’t have to complete every level to pass. Once a child is safe in the water and can swim a couple of laps, then they can swim. After that, lessons are about teaching a sport. If the child can’t do the technique, then they won’t move up. That doesn’t mean they can’t swim.
They just sit on the edge of the pool and sort of turn around and lower themselves into the water. I dont know if there's other techniques the use. I dont generally watch the lessons but I know she hasn't been able to dive in. There's no issues with the lessons themselves. She's a great little swimmer. Just can't dive
oh wow, never heard of this in Australia. I’m in Sydney. Just all council aquatic centres
>if you get caught by a rip at the beach it is a life and death matter very quickly and the energy you save from swimming properly can easily save your life.

The thing that will save your life if you get caught in a rip is knowing what you have to do when you get caught in a rip.

If Michael Phelps in his prime panicked and tried to swim against a strong rip he'd drown as well as anyone else.
A large number of swim centres are subcontracted to the Y to run them.
What is the Y?
YMCA
Gotcha. Thanks.
