Placed my order online last night for collection today at 12pm. I got a notification at 12 saying there was delays, all good, give the store a call at 1pm they inform me they are running about 2 hours behind, I didn't mind, working in retail I know things go wrong.

So I call them at 3:30pm to check my order is ready before I leave and they person on the phone tells me that they head office has cancelled all orders and we should have been notified.

This would all be fine except I still haven't been refunded,  and the shops close in QLD close at 6. Thankfully I can afford to do an additional $200 grocery shop for the week, but there are many who can't.

Still on the phone to customer service, I'll be curious if they offer any type of compensation, but doubt it.

Update: Still yet to hear from their online team to tell us that order has been cancelled, and been on hold to speak to someone for 2 hours

Update 2: After 2.5 hours I finally get put through to someone. My order still hadn't been cancelled in the system, so they have now actioned that, but it will be 3-5 business days till I'll see the money (I know that's on the banks not Woolworths) I asked about compensation considering it was a $230 order and they offered a $20 gift card....which I won't recieve for 24 hours.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
If their head office is cancelling orders on a weekend then something has broken spectacularly behind the scenes. I'm guessing some system is completely down and they aren't able to process orders at all. 


I just checked their app and it has a message that they are having issues, so something is probably very broken.



Unfortunately banks only process refunds Mon-Fri, so you'll likely have to wait until then.
Clearly they were having some greater issues, or else headoffice wouldnt have cancelled all the orders, which equals a lot of money to them. 

Refunds are tied to the bank, not stores, even if they processed them immediately it can take days for the bank to do their thing.
My local Woollies told me the system that looks after online orders 'broke' .  And they were pissed off that people could keep placing orders.
I mean if head office has cancelled all orders there's not a lot the individual stores can do.
I’ve been on hold for 3.5 hours. Finally got through, an entire system wide outage has occurred. Best they are offering is a $20 voucher for affected customers. We had our weekly shop delivery arrive and all that turned up was salt and chicken stock. They’ve placed a second order for me with all the missing items (but still charged a $2 bag fee).
Me too. Picking up my click n collect at 9pm tonight. I'm on Gold Coast.
Happened to us too, my wife went in to figure out what was going on and was told their systems had cancelled every order. They managed to complete the order about an hour late but have it to us free of charge (about $150 of groceries) which was incredible. They seemed incredibly stressed, I assume a lot of customers would have been blowing up at them. Have to stay nice ✌️
Take it to r/Colesworths 




Your minor annoyance with groceries isn't high on the list of issues within r/Australia 
I've never understood grocery delivery unless you are extremely unable like elderly or disabled
First world problems
A few months back we arrived home an hour before our scheduled delivery window. That window came and went with no delivery and a notice that it was delayed and would be 1hr later than the end of our window.

3 times the delivery was delayed with new times given.

At midnight, we are exhausted and want to go to bed, but still waiting on the most recent delivery time.

By chance, my husband opens the front door and there is our delivery. Looking at tue cameras, it was sitting there since before we even got home. Well before our delivery window. 

Luckily it was a freezing cold day in the middle of winter so most of the food was fine.
Well considering it's apparently a national outage and there's a cost of living crisis where many are living paycheck to pay check I'd tend to disagree
What a weird take.
One of the two major grocery stores in the country not honoring online orders and not paying back the dollar cost of what was paid is a pretty big deal (admittedly this is probably just the time it takes for that many digital payments to be reversed, but still)
Take it to r/complaints 

Your minor annoyance with someone posting on this sub isn’t high on the list of issues within r/Australia 
I surprisingly spend alot less on groceries by doing mine online, I can better plan out the week for dinners etc, look for the best specials, and can usually find a discount code. Plus there is no doubting if I already have something in cupboard.
… for collection.
If I can claw back a few hours of my precious weekend by having the groceries delivered, I will. If I can avoid the mouth breathing, snot snorfling, phlegm hacking, open mouth coughing, barefoot, arse scratching, aisle blocking walking dead that infest every supermarket, I will. If I can avoid weekend traffic, I will. 
Some people really really hate shopping


It's like asking why pay to have people to mow your lawn. Or have a Roborock instead of mopping the floors yourself.
Yeah, not being able to eat is *such* a first world problem…
Yeah, when something's missing maybe have a look?
Do you have small children?
So you can walk in and buy fresh bread and milk. I used to work for the online department as at Woolworth and the minimum life on milk and bread is tiny
How is that relevant?
It is very hard to do a big grocery shop in person with small kids. Click and collect is very helpful.
Sorry, I thought you were implying it should be mainly for those with kids. As someone suffering from a variety of broken body bits, I find it invaluable. I don't have kids.
Oh no, I was just thinking of another important group. Sorry, I could have phrased it better.

Multiple disabilities (awake with painsomnia right now) here too. Click and collect is fabulous.
