Surely only a few years ago their value range was $5?
Can get a local wood fired pizza for $20 who do they think are buying their crap?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Life hack: if you search Pizza Hut on Google, the first sponsored result is 40% off at Dominos
have you tried not selecting delivery, it's $7 for me pick up before vouchers
Value range (Including a Value pepperoni) is now $7.
Who the fuck pays full price for Domino’s?
Because you don't know how to use a website and/or correctly apply coupons. 
Everywhere around me is $25+ for a woodfired pizza - but alas the answer is discount codes
Well aren't you all fancy with your "my local pizza place" this and "woodfire pizza" that...
Errmm..my local pizza place IS Domino's there is no other option.!!!!
You have selected Delivery not Pick Up.
Who doesn't use frugal feeds coupons for domino's.
They printed too much money.
This whole thread reads like an attempt at a viral ad for Domino's. OP claims the price has risen, and everyone comes out to say, "actually, it's not, it's still really good value, you should totally check it out, look for coupons and other specials while you're at it!".
Google search "retailmenot dominos Australia".
I noticed by mistake the other day that different stores have different prices for the same products
Its got crazy expensive!
7 bucks in my app still.
I can't believe people buy that garbage.
Because their pricing structure is designed to push you towards the 2-for-1 options, do they can sell you a second pizza which costs them pennies to make and double the profit they would get on one sensibly priced pizza.

It’s the same reason Starbucks pushes you toward giant, expensive coffees.
If ur reading this try a Dom pep on thin base with peri swirl.
Why the fuck is anyone buying dominos still??
Because it's 2024. And you're a bitch, and learn to find and use a voucher
Last I remember franchisees got reimbursed for value range pizzas if they hit KPIs by corporate. They don't make money on them by themselves.
I got served an ad for domino’s just before where you got two pizzas, garlic bread and a drink for $29
Because that was the business model. Cheap pizza, starve out smaller competition, gain majority market share, raise prices high. Uber tried the same model but taxis didn't fold as expected.
Probably because it’s significantly less healthy?
Go get the wood fired
Dominoes is absolute garbage these days.. better off with the supermarket pizzas you can cook yourself
I don't  buy Domino's  pizza anymore it is crap all pastry not much topping.
Domino’s are a franchise so can technically charge whatever they want at individual stores
$17? my local pizza place does family size for $21.
combination of external cost increase factors that we cannot control, and the Reserve Bank jacking up interest rates despite the fact that it doesn't address those external factors in the slightest.
I thought they nuked that last year after it was revealed last time and everyone on the australia subreddit went to town on it.

{Edit} Just checked, yep they are doing it again. Looks like it's pizza for the weekend again
Haha been living off this cheat code for 10 years
But then you are stuck with dominos
Not in Sydney :(
didnt work in SA:( maybe it's for curtain states/regions only?
Yeah. I have no idea where op is getting $17. I just did the app for 1 pepperoni. $7 pick up with no vouchers or $27 delivered no vouchers.

People love to rag on dominoes, but when I see the half-price pizza email, I jump on that immediately.
Weird, at my local store, all the value pizzas are $7, *except* pepperoni, which is $11.

Loaded pepperoni is also $11, which makes me wonder why anyone would choose the Value version. 

I tried four nearby stores; two were $11, and the other two were $7.
Only the ignorant.
WHO eats domino’s junk ? I haven’t in 20yrs and don’t miss it. Same goes for Pizza Hut and I worked there while at uni. Home made pizzas are work, but taste heaps better. You know what’s on them and you can overload them to super tasty.
"Who the fuck pays ~~full price~~ for Domino's?"

FTFY
One of my most hated tropes. 😂 Everyone seems to have a local mom and pop pizza/burger/fish and chip shop slinging crazy cheap gear 7 nights of the week. 

Everyone except me.
Those who don't eat dogshit.
No, it just reads like a post from the average /r/Australia user. People complain about the price of anything and everything. Often valid, many times silly nonsense like this.

The OP has a long ordinary boring comment history. Not everything is a conspiracy
Thin base bbq sauce 😋
Standard neighbourhood pizza shop pizza is fucking revolting 9 times out of 10.

If I don’t want to splurge on actual proper Italian, wood fired pizza, I’ll get Phut or Domz. You know what you’re getting, it’s not trying to be amazing, it’s cheap, and it’s fast.
Me feeding 10 12year olds last night. I'm not making that many pizzas myself. For the fam, I make my own dough and all from scratch.
Yep, I used to like some shitty dominos but nowadays it’s dry as fuck and small. My local place does a small 9” pizza that is close enough to the “large” dominos pizza size for $8 and it’s actually good.
While that is how you think it logically would be, that is nowhere near what it is in actuality. The price that’s on the menu is set in stone by our head office, we can’t change that price at all. We get told weeks to months ahead of time the price changes of items. There are exceptions with rural stores however, they’re given the option to choose what their prices are from three different tiers of pricing options, again still decided by head office.

We can edit the price of an order through manager codes or special codes (manager specials) we make but not permanently change what is on the menu. If it’s $10 for a hawaiian on pick up, it’s $10 everywhere in Australia. If it changes to $11, it’s $11 everywhere in Australia (excl. surcharges)

If a store is charging you extra outside of that (excl. weekend/10pm/holiday surchages) then they’re messing up.
But it’s nothing to do with any of that lol
Worked for me just then in Sydney (Traditional and Premium range)
This works about 99% of the time, but I think it depends on the area. If you type into google “pizzahut” a 40% off deal for Dominoes comes up. 

Has worked every time I’ve wanted pizza.

Edit: someone already commented on this, whoops. Leaving it though because it’s a great tip.
There was a promo a while back that had a variety of super cheap pizzas from domino’s. Can’t remember the number or price but super cheap, sub $8-9 a large pizza delivered IIRC. 
We ordered 8 and mixed up the flavours and froze them. Easy dinners, and slightly better than ones from McCain
$20 delivery fee is up there
Last loaded we got was exactly the same as a normal pepperoni… hardly any slices. Did the feedback and they answered saying they measure all ingredients so it couldn’t be … but gave a code for a free one plus a side.
All of the value pizzas are $8 in my area, load is also $11
This has been happening on the app for a while now. For some reason ONLY the pepperoni value range pizza defaults to extra large, which is $11. But it's not always consistent.
Loaded pep is too much! 

The regret after eating a value pep is enough for me.
Some stores must really be horrible because they really aren’t as horrible as many yell about, the cheap Tuesdays especially is a solid deal
How’s the up air up there in that ivory tower mate?
Now now, they're no prize winning pizza. Unless the mediocrity awards are a real thing. But they hit their target audience well. Adequate food in usually reasonable time.
making your own at home is by far the cheapest option, it takes 15-20 mins and is better than dominos 100% of the time.

don't use "pizza bases", they're a ripoff and they suck, use lebanese bread (something like $4.50 for a bag of 6).

going to pick up a dominos pepperoni takes more effort than making your own at home.

i mean if you wanna eat shit, just do it, its 2024 you don't have to hide your true self anymore... just don't try to excuse it with lies like "oh but its cheaper and more convenient!".
it is entirely to do with those factors.
I just tried it in google and you are CORRECT. A sponsored advert for 40% off deal at dominoes came up once you scroll down past the pizza hut results.
Just tried that in New Zealand , and same result, 40%off at Dominoes
How far did you have to scroll? Went 7 pages and didn't see a single link about dominoes
They're supposed to take a photo of every pizza as it comes out of the oven (I think it happens automatically tbh), so they should be able to check that and see how much pepperoni was on it. The fact that gave you a freebie probably means they know they screwed up.
Yeah I had the same experience, back to value range for me
They taste like nothing. I don't know how they manage it.
For me, Pizza Hut is terrible, the base feels like cardboard, cheese never stretches. Dominos is always at least decent for me and sometimes really nice!
My tower ? I choose not to waste money on poor quality over-priced junk food. What’s ivory tower about that ? I didn’t say I was being all pious and grazing on bean shoots and tofu.
No it doesn’t because that cost is the delivery fee, a pepperoni pizza pick up from Domino’s is $7
They haven't done that for at least a year, and before that the cameras were constantly broken anyway.
I don’t think they’ve done that photo thing for ages now. It used to be also on the app, been taken away now.

And, yeah, they didn’t make it correct for sure, it had less pepperoni than even the base one has.
Damn, shows how long since I've ordered Domino's, lol. 🤣
