I want to buy assorted unsalted nuts (or make my own mixes). Best I've found at the moment is the unsalted Woolies brand nut mix, but they're roasted, and very peanut heavy, being lacking in other nuts. 

Anyone looked into this? Happy to buy online, interested in value for money!
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
For single nut varieties, Costco is best value, followed by Aldi. I don’t usually get assorted.
I dunno, was just born with them.
Middle Eastern super matket
Charlesworth Nuts are fantastic
All those cheaper nuts- Colesworth own brand ones- are from China.  Best not to imbib.  IGA has some great Aussie grown varieties.  Just pay a little more and do your body and health a favour.
My local Coles has a big “scoop our nuts” section, I’ll typically use that
[This is what I have found at Coles.  ](https://www.coles.com.au/product/coles-mixed-nuts-dry-roasted-mixed-nuts-400g-5299478)And it looks like they have a 100g bag for $2.90.

My neighbours used to dry roast their nuts in the oven.  Would buy raw in packs, lay a layer on a tray and put in the oven.  I can't tell you for how long and what temp tho.
Depends where you are. 

There's a chain called "The Source" - ~~but they've apparently only got one physical store in each state, although they do online shopping.~~

If you're in NSW, try Harris Farm.

If you're in the ACT, there are several places at the [Fyshwick Markets](https://www.fyshwickmarkets.com.au/) that sell varieties of nuts 

Pretty sure Victoria markets in Melbourne has places that do the same.

Edit : The source does, indeed, have more than one store per state. Their mobile site just sucks.
nutgrocer com au is my go to. cheap but you need to be up for buying whole kilos.
Best nuts are at Harbord Growers JCs.  Buy on line.
In Canberra, Southlands, Mawson.
The Coles near where I live has a pick-n-mix style self-serve nut selection. Bag up what you want, weigh and type in the relevant codes, take to checkout. It's great.
Check out The Source if there is one in your area. Their nuts are fresh and offer a range of raw, roast, salted etc. Their prices are pretty decent and with a loyalty card, you soon build up enough money for good discounts.
Costco for me.
https://www.trutaste.com.au/ is excellent in Melbourne's east but check markets and wholesalers in your area.
[Next Wednesday at Aldi](https://www.aldi.com.au/special-buys/special-buys-wed-14-august/).

Or the nut stall Box Hill market if it's still there.
Aldi cashew and pistachios are under $20/kg
Whoa someone’s a millionaire
The ones where you have scoops and mix your own bag? I've always thought those were pricey, but maybe I need to check again?
The Source has more than one physical store in each state. OP they have a website - have a look and hopefully there'll be one near you.
No.  Each product has a different price, so you'd have to use a different bag for each different nut, weigh it and print out the sticker and put it on the bag.
Interesting. I checked their website, and it definitely only showed me one store per state.

Ahhh. Appears it's just that their mobile site sucks. I can see many more now I'm on my desktop.
Yeah sorry I wrote that badly, I'm thinking of that one. Just surprised to hear someone recommend it, seems expensive.
I am not smart with money but I like almonds and those chilli lime soy crisps lol
Yes, it is expensive.  I would only buy nuts there if I normally don't eat a particular kind and fancied a handful - instead of buy a whole bag.  Not a huge fan of Brazil nuts but once in a while, I may buy 10 or so, just when I take a fancy.  This may happen once every couple of years.
