
You know what they say about marathons: "Go hard early."
I believe this had vindicated Athletics Australia’s decision to select Jess Stenson. The easy decision would have been to select Weightman but Stenson was clearly the better choice. She won at the Comm Games and wasn’t afforded the same opportunities as the other competitors due to her pregnancy. The selection panel saw the potential in Stenson given her less than ideal training leading up to qualifying. In this race she finished 13th, our fastest Aussie, and lead at the halfway mark. Well done Jess!
Good news. I'll tune in for the last half to see what happens.
If you’re winning early, you’re not winning late
they did awesome. also the lady who won is a beast. she has bronze from 5k and 10k as well. all in the space of 5 days.
Marathon? Call me a Cab!

I do admire marathon runners, their dedication and level of fitness. It's totally out of my reach.
Lol halfway point in a marathon, that means nothing.... A lot runners can lead till the last 1km and still lose...
2 Australians now at the front!
No idea how long it will last.
I'd go in a marathon too if I could bring my motorbike.
It's a marathon not a sprint!
An incredible Olympic marathon!
They did awesome! We've certainly punched well above our weight in the athletics!
Whoop whoop
Go women ! Wooo!! 

Show the men how it’s done. Leading in this and also many other sports ;)
Maybe they shouldn’t have had a behind-the-scenes “prove your fitness” option for Sinead, and then when it was apparent she wasn’t, she should have offered her spot to Lisa (like Brett did a few weeks ago). AA already showed they were gutless and biased, now they’ve proved it.
The only villain is the woman who clearly started the marathon injured
> It's totally out of my reach. 

Unless there's a physical/medical reason, I would bet you could run a marathon in a year. Check with your doctor, and just go slow with training and a "screw it I'm doing this!" attitude.
Well, has it lasted?
In front by 5 metres from looking at your photo. Meaningless at halfway.
Diver is one of our most consistent mara runners we've got. I'm still yet to hear that she was holding an injury going into the race, and from current reports she had serious quad cramps starting out.


With all of her previous accomplishments over the years I'm more than willing to give her the benefit of the doubt.
It did not last
Now 16th and 18th.
