
not really news if youve worked with in the ADF or the public service. one of the first things you get taught is theres no friends in cryptography and if you wouldnt tell your best mate something personal then you wont tell an ally
Just remember ASIO had a mole reporting to the USSR for decades and the last thing he did before retirement was organise his replacement.  They still haven’t found who it was.

Guaranteed the republicans are hard at work influencing our right wing but we shouldn’t be surprised if Israel and India are active in their respective communities here.  India can be a bit concerning considering their history with the USSR and utter contempt of the UK.
About time the media addressed this. This is HUGE in the Indian community.  

Indian spies have been in our community for ages.

Definitely Israel too and their lobbying.
Absolutely India at the top of the list...closely followed by Israel. Both those nations aren't even subtle about it. A definite definite.

As an independent thinker (i.e. conspiracy theorist), I'd definitely add the USA to that list. 

Vietnam is also pretty active here, but are they friend or foe these days?

Can't forget about Ukraine too to balance out the Russian efforts. The whole Balkan thing continues to bubble away here too. Gotta watch those Serbs and Croats.
I cannot find the SBS article now, but Little India Business Council president from Paramatta was angry at Sikhs, and said he had sent a list of people to the Indian Embassy so that they can blacklist them for visa. These are the people that need to be put on foreign agent registry.
The French government straight up killed a guy on NZ soil for protesting pacific nuke testing in 1985 and then the EU and USA threatened to embargo NZ for complaining about it.


Nobody can be trusted.
I'm guessing China and India; the latter being the one referred to as a "friend"?
NewsCorp is a US company registered in New York and has paid no tax in Australia for years.
I'm astonished this thread wasn't locked the instant it was posted.
Wow really?  
I had some bright sparks tell me that it was only China just a few months ago and that our allies would never
The largest foreign "interferer" is America followed a long behind is China and then India. 

Are they the "friendly countries"?
Indonesia: Ooh, goshhhh, that must be soooo hard for you. Say, did our president just miss a call?
singapore and south korea btw are  ones previously mentioned
I'm pretty sure these nations are ones we have active alliances with, sell weapons to and are not five eyes members. 

India, Israel, France

India being able to pull off an assassination in Canada is probably the big one.
India was in the news just two months ago for having spies sent home from Australia a couple of years ago

[https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-06-17/modis-indian-government-accused-of-spying-silencing-critics/103974414](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-06-17/modis-indian-government-accused-of-spying-silencing-critics/103974414)
[Home affairs definition](https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/about-us/our-portfolios/national-security/countering-foreign-interference/defining-foreign-interference)

The 5 eyes are unlikely to be included in his warning because FI is BAU so of the remaining allies, China, Israel and France top the list.
Ahh the spook. I always enjoy the company of your rate at the mess.
>As an independent thinker (i.e. conspiracy theorist), I'd definitely add the USA to that list.


Wouldn't surprise anyone, really. They're the world's most powerful country with a [strong history](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_involvement_in_regime_change) of interfering with other nations.
Imagine Australia filling a stadium with 50K aussie expats in India or China for a political rally. Probably wouldn't go down too well.

Modi did it in Australia - that's how I know India are [#1 in milk production](https://youtu.be/VhlPL_-RONg?t=2182). Albo sat next to him learning about how awesome India is the entire speech - very little mention of Australia at all.
Vietnam is small potatoes, the vast majority of Vietnamese people here are second gen or more. It's mostly the aUs, China and India in order of influence.


Vietnam is honestly too the least of the three. If anything they're the friendliest nation for manufacturing.
>Absolutely India at the top of the list...

With the shit they pulled in Canada, they're pretty obviously at the top of the list.
The US is already interfering openly with our communities by half the people using their news/social media/Hollywood/music and cultural domination. There is no large US citizen community for them to interfere with and nothing to gain by an operation like this. 

What would the USA want to do to its citizens living in Australia? China wants to stop criticism and counter movements and show its people need to stay in line even overseas. India wants to crack down on fringe groups. USA doesn't care about any of that and wants to keep good relations with Australia.
no doubt they're spying on us. but which local communities do you think the usa as a government are "interferring with"?
Is there any Israeli community in Australia? There are a few Jews who generally support Israel but that's hardly outside interference as they are Australians advocating for closer international relations with another country.
No, it's who we least expect. Kiwis.
The amount of CCP propaganda spread through Whastsapp by elderly Chinese heritage people in Australia is astounding.
Why not both?
Pretty open about it, how else would ex commanders like Peter Cosgrove be able to work for USA mega lobby groups.


They just brought in a law that makes it illegal for ex service men to train Chinese.
nah not a spook, just a lowly chook
(including Australia)
Big chance Iran funding a few things here also
The USA has been operating Pine Gap with Australia for decades and for decades it’s been used to spy on who both countries wish to spy on. [It’s own Wikipedia page](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pine_Gap) advises in 1992, the US whistleblower stated the US was using it to spy on Australians in addition to not sharing intelligence.

Fast forwarding 20 years, [NSA advises in the Snowden leaks if it’s in the best interest of the USA, they will spy on anyone world wide they need to including Australians.](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/05/nsa-considered-spying-on-australians-unilaterally-leaked-paper-reveals) 

If the argument is why would they spy on their own citizens or Australian citizens, the answer is because they can, and because it provides them information to then cross check against the information they find out via official channels. 

If an American leaves, gets turned by our intelligence assets and returns to America, they’d want to know. 

Further, if a terrorist cell that exists in Indonesia and in western Sydney might target Americans, they’d want to know.

There is no benefit to assume America had a treaty with us therefore does not wish to know the truth rather than the information we are willing to share. They have said for decades they will trust, but if it’s in their best interests to know, they will find out themselves.
Going for that Culture War Victory in Civilization and almost there
Today I learned that listening to music and watching marvel movies makes me a victim of foreign interference.

Come on brother - let’s be serious.
They don't need to target their own communities. They can target others, as well as (the so called) mainstream Australia.
Australian businesses. There are hearsay statements that Five Eyes and other projects are doing corporate espionage for lobby mates.
White Anglo mainstream Australia. Ever watched Sky News?
There was an organised group of over 200 Jewish people who organised a media attack on an ABC journalist. That probably counts. 
This is an interesting comment from someone who has regurgitated zionist commentary for the better part of a year.
Bloody Sam Neil, Russell Crowe and Tim Finn. I knew it.
ASIO chief indicated there were friendlies amongst the ones they’re watching and that some would surprise us.  NZ would definite surprise me. Israel and India would not but they are at the top of my list.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7xUYbI64QHI
>Kiwis.


Ah yes, natural ally to the emu.
It's same for every diaspora community. In so many homes I have been, Indian channels are the only god forsaken channels played, and they are some of the worst propaganda spreaders around. I just wonder how badly they might be affecting the kids psyche. 

Other day my kid was so proud of Jess Fox, and she was mimicking the newscasters language "choppy waters, but she still held her nerves to win a gold". Now this is the calm language I want my kid to grow up with. None of this can be found in Indian channels.
> They just brought in a law that makes it illegal for ex service men to train Chinese.

As it should be.  We are a trading partner with the chinese, but we are militarily tied to USA and NATO.  China is currently aligned with Russia, NK and Iran militarily and the any veteran that think its a good idea to train them could potentially be threatening the lives of our current and future service members.
Soft diplomacy is absolutely a thing.
Do you say "zed" or "zee"?   ;)
You are on American owned Reddit right now, getting American dominated stories and opinions.

You gotta be joking me thinking if you grew up watching Chinese kids shows, action movies, music, toys, the majority of everything you consume was in Chinese, you bet you would be more open to Chinese opinions and view them more favorably. 

The USA is definition of soft power, there are constantly stories about losing our own culture to US dominance. Even Australian English is dying to American English.
I’d say it’s more about US personalities on like YouTube or twitch but I don’t think it’s like an attempt to get us lol
A cybersecurity friend at a Big 4 tells me from his limited observations, a large chunk of the "regular intrusions" (as opposed to attacks) come from "friendly" nations, including the USA.
as i say, no doubt they're spying on us as we are on them. that's the deal. burgess is talking about "interfering with local communities". that doesn't sound like corporate espionage to me so just trying to find out if we really think nz, us, canada, uk are in the frame for what burgess is talking about.
natch but hardly a covert operation that would "shock people if they knew". also not sure the current us government is a huge fan of the murdoch empire.
Oh man go to r/worldnews if you want to see some brigading / organised up/downvoting 
Yep, that post history was pretty interesting. I think we found the Israeli agent.
It goes all the way back to Dinah Lee, Max Merritt, Doug Parkinson and Dave Dobbyn.
Bruh
USA?

+ India
It’s got to be us. We want to steal your secrets of how to build functional infrastructure and public transport. Our politicians and public servants haven’t got a clue.
Couldn't agree more - I certainly would not put it in the same category as foreign interference. Coercing diaspora communities and cultivating secret networks to compromise our national security and steal information is not the same as foreign films.

AFP: "Foreign interference is an activity carried out by or on behalf of a foreign government. The activity may be coercive, threatening, deceptive or clandestine. It undermines Australia's sovereignty, values and national interests."

​​​Home Affairs: "Foreign interference occurs when activity carried out by, or on behalf of, a foreign power, is coercive, corrupting, deceptive or clandestine, and contrary to Australia’s sovereignty, values and national interests."

The US (and the EU) donate a tonne of money to civil society groups internationally, many whom do great work promoting good governance and human rights, representing marginalised groups and simply by being linked to a foreign government they risk significant jail time. Is this foreign interference?
We are talking about foreign interference, not soft power. I would argue there is a pretty big distinction, particularly in terms of methods.

Foreign interference is government-directed, clandestine and designed to weaken social cohesion and institutions. Yes, I read stories on US media sites - that is NOT foreign interference.
The elected USA government talks up the long term closeness of our two countries, but the back office would much prefer we were a bit more to the right.
Most mainstream Australia is asleep and thinks in Black and White. Most would be shocked because "America is our friend" and "Russia/China is the enemy". As we know, the world is a complex place.
But not John Clarke.
India is definitely the number one so called “friendly” nation interfering closely followed by Indonesia. 

It is extremely obvious to those of us who speak out online against any wrong doing being done by those two countries in particular. 

ASIO needs to get off their arse, if anyone in ASIO is reading this comment you are not doing nearly enough!
What would you call the Whitlam dismissal.
Yeah I was the one who said it wasn't the USA running an interference op in the first place because they dont have to.

It is splitting hairs saying it doesn't count as foreign interference though because it is not a government op to interfere with our values or sovereignty, when the USA has had so much historical influence and dominance they basically set those values and sovereignty the first place. The post WW2 order and rules we live by and becoming an advanced developed country and economy was through US winning WW2 and being our superpower ally.
Deep cover.
Never Fred Dagg.
India is 110% it and honestly it's like calling a scammer a "friend"

India is always trying to profile China as the enemy to others and misdirect away from them to China, while promoting themselves as "innocent"
I don't disagree, they'd be on the list. 

But the USA interfered in the Whitlam dismissal, they just don't give up and walk away after a few years.
By your logic, all pop culture is foreign interference. That’s complete nonsense because we have agency in consuming culture - whereas foreign interference is coercive.

I’m not arguing that the US doesn’t have crazy hard and soft power, but it is not ‘splitting hairs’ to point out that this would not fit the definition of foreign interference.
