Assuming it's true that Raygun has a PhD in ... breakdancing?!

No wonder university education has a problem. Why is 'breaking' funded at university level?
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
PhD students aren't getting funded for shit except a minimum wage payment while they complete their studies.
PHD's can be in any subject as long as it's original research. This is not news.
I’m sure she’s got a whopping hecs / pels debt she’s paying off, so I don’t know what you’re complaining about.

Also, it’s in cultural studies. The topic of her paper is about breakdancing… as in the culture of breakdancing.
You misunderstand the situation on a basic level , any opinion you hold on this matter will be meaningless.
A PhD in Cultural Studies, focusing on breakdancing and dance culture.
Because the culture of breakdancing is a thoroughly interesting and complicated topic?

>  Why is 'breaking' funded at university level?

Because PhD students are capable of understanding the point you are missing, the dancing itself isnt want being studied but the CULTURAL impacts on how it came about; the social, political and racial reasons took hold and why it endured.
It was for researching and writing about breakdancing, not for breakdancing itself. PhD scholarships only go to the highest of students, not to all
Because it's a sociology degree, I imagine.
Right wing out in force on this topic. Is this really what is important to them?
There's no such thing as a PhD in Breakdancing per se, possibly she has a PhD in Fine Arts.  A PhD involves the independent investigation of a research problem formulated by in consultation with supervisors. PhD students produce a research thesis of no more than 80,000 words.

Most likely Raygun has a Bachelor of Fine Arts (Dance) which under current funding arrangements caps student costs at $8000 per annum or about $24000.   Students who complete a Fine Arts (Dance) degree receive a "specialist education in an inclusive range of contemporary dance practices, dance science and somatics, critical dance studies, choreography and performance.".

To have undertaken a PhD she would need to have also either copleted an honors year, or completed a masters degree.

So if she has a PhD in it it's because she has undertaken and produced research in the field that has been deemed sufficiently novel and of a high quality to warrant it.  If she has a lesser qualification it wasn't just learning Break dancing for 3 years.

Cultural and creative industries contributed 122.3 Billion dollars to the economy in 2019.  I couldn't find good figures on how much of that related to dancing, but it's fair to say the Fine Arts and Dance are a worthwhile course for Univerisries to offer for just on account of the financial value of the industry, let alone it's cultural value.
I see where you're coming from, but it did get her to thr Olympics
It was a question, remember?
[deleted]
They despise education because it's how people discover everything these dingbats are desperate to protect is either bullshit, actively harmful and benefits only a time group of hyper wealthy/powerful.
The criticism is nuanced. And so far most of the outrage has come from the more left leaning students that I've encountered. Privilege, appropriation and misrepresentation are some of the issues that maybe as a pHd in the liberal arts Dr Gunn might have considered before making such a problematic move as to take the spot away from someone more qualified.
Her qualifications are on her Macquarie University staff page.

>Rachael Gunn is an interdisciplinary and practice-based researcher interested in the cultural politics of breaking. She holds a PhD in Cultural Studies (2017) and a BA (Hons) in Contemporary Music (2009) from Macquarie University.

https://researchers.mq.edu.au/en/persons/rachael-gunn
if the moon is made out of cheese why cant we go eat it ? why are we not funding nasa more money for sweet sweet moon cheese ?

Also a question based on no understanding.
Someone doesn't understand the old meaning of the word philosophy and how it applies to doctorates. 

If it's not law, theology or medicine, it's philosophy.
Nope
Yeah nah. Yes that is what it stands for but it doesnt need to be in Philosophy.
Yes aussies should just get a degree in building a house and we can all go straight into property
Wait but for real, why aren't we eating the moon?
love me some sweet moon cheese, save me a slice.

Aw the kids are being taught the wokeisms aw bloody arts degrees awwww! People eh
Because it's a logistical nightmare trying to bring a worthwhile quantity back to down to earth. Otherwise, you risk a global event nacho cheese rain and completely wipe out a country or two.
That's a risk I'm willing to take, get it done.
> nacho cheese rain

That's a risk with steep re-entry temperatures - but if we were able to take a shallower path (remembering life support for cheese can last a lot longer than for humans) we can pick a better trajectory with lower temps
