
One of their golds was in female breakdancing, I haven't been keeping up with the news this week, but Im sure we were close in that
We have one more realistic chance to catch them in the mens keiran 2 aussies in the finals of 6, they have 1 also

Either way nice from both Japan and our Aussies
When the Kiwis excel as anything, I refer to them as 'fellow Australasians'.
The Olympics are coming to a close, time to pivot to believing that medals per capita is the most important thing.
At least we’re still ahead of the poms. ;-)
If only things had worked differently for Raygun. She could have taken the gold from the Japanese b girl and we would be cheering her.
What did Japan get that last gold in?
They won a gold for Breaking. So bad
Come on! 4th is pretty good, considering the population in Australia.
We'll beat the UK, that is a massive win.
A few of our silver medals were agonisingly close to being gold as well.

The men's four-man kayak/K4, for example; they missed out on gold by 4 hundredths of a second.
So much silver since our golden night
I blame Raygun. We definitely would have beat Japan at breaking if we sent anyone else /s. (Though I do wish we could have lost with a bit more integrity)
Wouldn’t it be devastating if RayGun’s antics cost us 3rd.
At least we have Rachael “Raygun” Gunn..
Fingers crossed for track racing. Does Japan have any more gold medal matches ?
It was the break dancing, wasn't it?  That is what sent us to such a high mark?   Awesome work for 25 million people.
How many medals per capita?
Didn't expect Australia 4th. Good job, guys!
If only Raygun had’ve not been robbed by people who can actually breakdance
they smashed it in the wrestling
If only we won gold in breakdancing then we would be third
Dammit Japan!!
Was while it lasted
You've done really well.  One of the big Olympic hitters like the UK.  We haven't managed to convert to gold enough this Olympics though.  Shame.

Well done guys.
American here with an honest question. Why do you guys hate us so much? Lol. Is it just because of our rivalry in the pool? 

I tend to think of Australia, Japan, and South Korea as our closest allies and friends in that Eastern Asia / Oceania region.  Easy to root for you guys when it is not a head to head match up. Is that not reciprocated at all?
+1 OPALS BABY
I really hope China beats the USA. Not the I particularly like China, but after reading all the cocky comments by Americans online I would like them to eat a bit of humble pie for a change.
At least that got something out of the Tokyo games other than a large debt.
Unironically ray guns fault.
We hit a pretty rich silver vein after we got that 18th gold.
As long as we're folding the poms in the tally, that's the best kind of victory I want to see from us in any Olympics tbh.
How the hell did Japan pick up two golds in five hours?!?!
It must be the Australian beef
I don’t think we did as good as it’s made out. New Zealand finished with 10 Gold, only 8 less than us.
Was Japan’s #19 for breakdancing?
Why is this a bad thing, do we get an extra medal for being in the top three?! This doesn’t change what our country has achieved in the games.
[ We Did Quite Well For A Country Our Size](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m8CNlUr9ZVA)
You know it might be time to finally Annex New Zealand, we already have 10% of their Pop living here so seems like a minor thing. With our powers combined we would be 3rd by a huge gap
When your rent is $750 a week, and butter is $8, who the fuck has time to become the best in the world at anything except ignoring the guillotine hanging over their head?
The whole medal table thing is quite silly. The medals belong to those who win them. They aren't the emotional ego padding for a population. Convince me I'm wrong.
Oh noes! :(
We did SO WELL though 🥲 was so keen to get third, but alas. I think Brisbane we can get top 3 for sure!
Can’t imagine the US would be happy sitting in second place behind China. 

But Damn Australia is doing really well. Whether you take the current US count method (total medals) or the offical Olympics count (number of golds).
Given the respective populations of the top 4 countries, and the fact there are 196 countries, it's pretty damn impressive Australia is number 4.
Sometimes I wish our nurses and teachers got as much recognition as our canoeists and skateboarders.
Japan absolutely crushed those last couple of days. Lol. Needed 5 to beat us, they got 6 I think. Cracking job.  

Still our best ever, would have been sweet to get a podium though!
Man China are wild, if they in it, they in it to win. That ratio of gold versus silver/bronze is insane
Damnit! We were so close! If only we had one one more gold in the Swimming.
Raygun gave it her all!
Best medals-per-population, fwiw.
哈哈
Fuck. That's too bad.
"That's what makes it look like hip hop"
Womp, womp.
With ~100 million more people than us, this seems not unreasonable.
I’m amazed it lasted this long after the swimming ended.
we need the american version which looks at the total medal count… 😉
It’s in order of population size.
Two words….more cowbell
Eh, good for them, Japan are our friends. Well done to them.
Time to start measuring success the American way.
[DAMN YOU, GOJIRA!](https://getyarn.io/yarn-clip/5d358eb7-f4a2-4896-b004-8563993cf00a)
It is bitter sweet!
Don't worry, we're 3rd on America's list
Was hoping that the Break dancing would even us up but didn’t work out
NZ got 10 gold.

We need to hurry up and unify with them.
For such a small country we are bloody awesome mate
Oi! We beat Great Britain and Japan just hosted it! I see this as an absolute win.

Even better, the pom's have more medals than us, but we have more GOLD! Suffer in ya Jocks
Thats alright - They might take 3rd place but they never took PNG! #kokoda
Welp, atleast we're still in the top 5
From ya kiwi cousins, well done Australia! We're pretty proud of you guys coming in so high in the rankings, love ya!
Excellent showing from NZ too; 10 gold
since NZ was left out of the closing ceremony map, I propose we combine our medal counts
Did we come 4th in golds? Fuck me not bad all things considered. 

US and China ended up tying on gold and US is ahead on silver so got their win.
A country with around 25 to 26 million people won 18 gold medals. I think Australia won Olympics!
18 golds and we will be remembered for only one performance at Paris 2024.
The absolute highlight has to be that we won 2 gold - beating the USA in a sport they invented. In fact, between us and Japan, we kept the USA completely goldless in a sport they invented.
I am surprised  America and Australia are not using the other table with number of medals lol 😆
Still a solid effort. VB longnecks all round
Australia on me of the best per capita nations this year
The medal tally is irrelevant when you consider the Gold Medal of the entire Olympics went to Raygun from Australia. We were the highlight of the entire Olympics!
As an American I can say that Australia should be quite proud of their medal haul. To put things in perspective here are is the ratio of gold medals to the total population per country.

China: Total Population (1,419,000,000)/Total Gold Medal (39) = 36.8 million per gold medal.

US: Total Population (333,000,000)/Total Gold Medal (38) = 8.76 million per gold medal.

Japan: Total Population (123,753,000)/Total Gold Medal (19) = 6.153 million per gold medal.

Australia: Total Population (27,000,000)/Total Gold Medal (18) = 1.5 million per gold medal

If I look at things this way Australia absolutely kicked ass in the medal count per population. My complete respect to you Aussies!!
I’m a fan of the gold medal and overall medal tally per capita.
Puts it into perspective far more than most gold or total medals
Melbourne won, good work
They gave the women "break dancer" from your cuntry a pitty gold, what else do yall want!?
Fuck off Japan
Sorry about the outcome fellas. No one told us there was a rivalry.🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🇺🇸🦅🦅🦅🦅
Australia sucks
Gee the United States are the best at coming second. Take some time to congratulate any American's you come across
USA not #1. Japan and Australia are doing well 😊
where are the asians getting all these gold medals? I havent seen them winning any of the events i have been watching.
[deleted]
How would the ranking be if it was spread across the number of people in each country?
We should order it by total medals. It’s a bit disrespectful to the silver and bronze winners not to.
Peak
The two gold medals Japan picked up to overtake us were in the wrestling.
I am officially on the 'not a real sport' bandwagon.
and also an outside chance in the Women's Omnium.. we're sitting on 2nd at the moment
Silver and bronze in the Kieran to Australia. 

Gold to the Dutch

The Dutch and Kiwis have had a great Olympics.
Also they've got like 100 million extra people in their population, so we're still punching way above our weight.
Someone tell the japanese it wasn't the Whale, Dolphin, Cow or Chicken.
yeah, fingers crossed! Although in the keirins, there are 2 other Japanese racers 😭
Same HAHA, we'll share the victories w our mates from across the ditch
If 4 Countries can complete together as the UK then yes, why can't us 2?
HA!! And they will absolutely love to be included as such mate, don’t let them tell you otherwise.
Should do one of those combined tables like the EU do
Not overly dissimilar to “Great Britain”…
As per tradition, we claim their medals as our own.
A reminder they were actually more likely to join the federation than WA. 

Imagine that? We wouldn’t even be Girt.
Aussies still way behind NZ per capita, you Aussies would just drag us down.
Weren't we always doing that?
So instead of 4th we come even lower. Go check the medals per capita ladder we are getting beaten by New Zealand and ever island nation with just one gold.

edit: spelling
What about in dollars spent per medal per capita
I saw a video that used binomial distribution to sort medals in a “fair” way and we come out on top for summer games. Our population is small enough, but our medal count high enough that we beat out other countries
I don't think anyone thinks it's the most important thing. But it's definitely an impressive metric. Compared to the top 3, we have a tiny population by comparison.
Don’t forget location blob plus per capita. 

*Australasia* got one medal per 440,000 people.
Nah nah nah, check out [this ](https://www.olympicnationalrankings.com/) bad boy. Works much better for us than per capita
This guy does a great breakdown on the best way to see who performed best. As the 'per capita' tally has its own issues.  
  
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5fR\_\_LXDkRg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5fR__LXDkRg)
We just need to absorb NZ as another state, then we can add their medal tally to ours, bringing us to a convincing third place.
Time to realise that most people don't care.  Spend the $$ on grass roots to encourage kids to excel at sports if they can and want to, I don't see value in spending $$ on training “Olympians”. Worste case those athletes “only” perform at local / National level…so be it!If they love the sport they will participate regardless, being an Olympian shouldn't be the driving factor, the far majority of Australian’s really don't care.
And the French!
And New Zealand
except Raygun is the only thing we'll be remembered for this year so none of it really matters in the long run
This is so true. Japan has done very well this Olympics. But as long as we're ahead of the Poms it's a win XD
Indeed, Indeed they cant catch us
Fml
As long as we beat the poms its a good Olympics
It's about time. Haven't done that since 2004. Though Japan's gotten very good, though it could be post host bump.
Or if you look at it alternatively, CANZUK smashed it:
- Gold: 51
- Silver: 55
- Bronze: 59
- **Total: 165**

Beating the Yanks by a landslide with half the population
Not just the poms, but the poms combined with Scotland Wales and northern Ireland, because for some reason 4 countries are allowed to compete as 1.
I was sure she had it when she pulled out that Sprinkler move
wrestling. I never expected that
To japan, wresting is like what Swimming is to Australia.
Ironic 🫠🫠
How did they beat the kangaroo hops?
She was great though.
Still not the worst event IMO, as long as we have equestrian events where humans aren't even doing most of the work.

There's something silly every year though, it's basically tradition at this point. It'll be flag football in 2028.
I was curious so I looked it up, Australia has about 20% the population of Japan, 10% of USA and 2% of China
It’s more accurate to look at funding than population. That’s where the difference is made
it's great! But 3rd was in our grasp for the last 3 week till the very last day... RIP
Also the hosts France.
I FUCKING KNOW RIGHT? it's wild how lucky we were at the start of the olympics, and how unlucky we were at the end of the olympics.
hearbreaking fr
Maybe this is a silly take, but I think Raygun should be a cherished national treasure for you guys. Was it ridiculous? Absolutely. But she brought more joy to more people than almost any other athlete at these games. She has a great attitude, and is a student of the art. Physically gifted? No. Inspirational? I think so.
**Dr** Raygun thank you very much…
Such an awesome call sign. Up there with Maverick and Iceman.
We lost track racing. Japan has 1 final wrestlin final. ggs
we always have that to fall back on! But Would be sick to win on absolute merit yk?
Still ranking 8th per capita, but rank 4 per gdp!
We'd go even further back.
I don't think Japan has as many young people as aus due to the birth issue 


I like stats but per capita isn't great for Olympics comparision.


Money spent per medal seems a reasonable one
About 7 copes/medal
the guys roll was broken asfff, 8 point in 1 movement what a machine
Think I jinxed it with my "poised for 3rd" post, my bad guys
just a bit of rotten luck mate, I'm sure y'all will do great in LA!
Bear in mind that reddit (and social media in general) is the worst way to form an opinion of a country's people.
We hate everyone that we remember the existence of with goodwill. It's not a bad indicator until you're someone we forgot about first. Belgium is the real enemy
It’s just banter, you guys confuse our joking with malice. We tease you guys but it’s all in love, infact the amount we tease is a good indicator of our love! We straight up bully our little brother New Zealand. 

Definitely don’t take reddit opinions as indicative of the broader population.
No one hates America, what people hate is Redditors from America coming into the Australian sub and posting photos of them heading up the medal table as it's some form of national supremacist statement lol.
the last time we were 3rd in the olympics was 1956, so it's moreso about beating our record, thank other countries! We were holding onto 3rd for so long, then Japan beating us on the last day sucked 😭

I think in general, it's easy to root for the underdog too, imagine if Australia had dominated every olympics, then suddenly America was 2nd-> surely you'd root to win even if its against an ally-> friendly competition!

FWIW, I'm in a Sydney pub watching USA v FRA basketball finals, and we're ALL rooting for y'all 🥳!
I think a lot of us would prefer to back an underdog (e.g. Serbia in the basketball). 
Because we like underdogs here. It's got nothing to do with international relations neither. If that were the case, we'd all be loving Americans and the Brits. It's just a sporting rivalry.
[deleted]
It’s just Reddit. You can find plenty of redditors from every country that hate us. I’ve met quite a few Aussies and they’ve all been very friendly towards me. The people that spend 6 hours a day on Reddit talking shit about us are most likely very depressed and angry at everyone and everything.
Try not to take it too seriously. It's part of our culture to take jabs at friends. Have you seen our relationship with the Kiwis? There is a lot of shit slung back and forth between our siblings across the way, but we all know we've got each other's back at the end of the day.

Don't get me wrong, there a few pricks that have a legitimate chip in their shoulder, but they're a loud minority. Most of us are either indifferent about Americans or don't mind you guys at all (or at least if we ignore your recent state of politics....). I have noticed that a lot of the comments especially over at the Olympics sub from Americans getting the shits at Australians were focusing on just a few of the worst comments. Again, loud minority. If you canvas all the other comments we're putting out, you'll notice a lot of us are just proud of our athletes.

I know early on, a lot of Americans were taking issue with us pointing out how some of your news outlets were tallying medals. Like, I noticed A LOT of Americans taking it as proper vitriol over in the Olympics sub. Thing is, for a lot of us, that was us poking fun. If you haven't noticed, in this sub we even poke fun at our own habit of counting medals per capita.

Unfortunately, despite both being western nations, I've found a lot of that sort of humour gets lost in translation between the two nations. Australians have a habit of poking fun to the point where it might seem offensive to another nation. I can tell you without a doubt, a lot of those same people poking fun knew that the American athletes would start kicking some ass as the days went on. There was no ill will there. We saw an opportunity to strike before your athletes started ramping up the heat so we took it!

Part of it is because you guys are the biggest fish in the sea. It's easy for a lot of people to see the biggest fish as the bully, especially when they win again and again and again. Because of that, people will poke fun at you, or they'll straight up hate you. But you know what? One of the biggest joys of this game has been watching the big fish's most wholesome moments. Not many countries can display the type of good sportsmanship that your athletes have (Simone Biles anyone?).

But yeh, TLDR: most of us don't actually hate you.
Canadian here who has spent time in Australia. Australia is a Chinese puppet state and they don't even know it. They are influenced by Chinese bots and media. They are so far removed from the west and so close to China that it was bound to happen. Their view of the USA is so drastically different than any other western nation I've spent time in, including my own. It's actually really fascinating to see. I'd love to see a documentary style film on social media influence over a country.
trueeee go the opals! Wish it was gold :((
lol as if they won’t just change it to “total medals” because yanks are incapable of accepting they aren’t the best.
won't happen now. 1 gold to level with China
Hold this L. Never bet against America.
Whomp whomp
Eat shit we just tied up
I glad china beat US because those americans are too arrogant and lack of sportmanship in the entire game, and it also a win for not just chinese people but Asians as a whole.

Edit: unfortunately it's was a tie, a good race nonetheless
Another L
The cocky comments were in retaliation to your guys’ cocky comments early in the Olympics when you were bragging about beating the US 💀it was your own fault for bragging about having more golds than America and not remembering how the Olympics have gone historically. Australia pulls out ahead at the start, then the swimming events end, and the US slowly catches up and passes. But congratulations on having such a hate boner you would literally choose one of your global political adversaries versus your literal ally who was under and escaped British rule just like you
Haha ;)
Wrestling, I believe.
No, it and # 20 were in the wrestling.
for sure! it just would have been historic if we ranked 3rd, bc we haven't gotten better before
Technically youre not wrong as the IOC dont provide a tally themselves
You're absolutely right, medals are for the individuals, it's just this strong sense of national pride (for every country) that comes with the Olympics, it's an easy way to measure their countries greatness... Lol.
The athletes from many countries are paid or supported by their governments. Whether it’s a national institute of sport or money paid directly for results, it’s still taxpayer money being allocated to achieve the win. So in some part, it’s still countries that define the medal tally.
yes! 2032 here we come!!
legit- they going bonkers fr
That’s what a state sponsored doping program will do. That guy that won the 100m freestyle gold is the clearest evidence yet of doping. Beats the field by over a second and smashes the WR in a pool that is so slow, no other WR was broken.
Nah they have 20 now
exactly! And in soooo many sports this past week we JUST missed out on gold and got silver
of course! But it would be nice to be up there in the official tally too yk
I hate this word, but that's pure cope
mood. Yesterday they had like 13 medals or something. Now they have 20. WTF!?!??
There isn't LOL. Y'all have 10x our population, of course you're going to get more medals. We were just excited to be 3rd, something we haven't done in 66yrs.
No one cares about seppo land. They're referencing Japan.
USA is expected to be gold after the USA v FRANCE bball womens final
I think they're really great at all the fine-motor sports, such as table tennis. Also Japan was surprisingly cracked at wrestling -> 7 medals. the 2nd highest country in wrestling, Iran, got 2...
Judo, wrestling, gymnastics, fencing, skateboarding, javelin throw and breaking.
Perhaps you’ve just been watching curling plus the dozen events in canoe. Otherwise Asians of all stripes were winning in multiple categories from boxing to wrestling to volleyball to weightlifting, not just TT or badminton as some here would like to make it seem. Heck there were Chinese and Japanese sprinters with nobody else with black runners in sight.
Maybe try watching a few different sports
Not true. Not one medal they won in 2004 was ones we won this year.
The Russians would have taken medals from the US (gymnastics and basketball) and maybe some others below us. We may have still been behind the US but the gap would have been much closer. Russia would have been below us.
Fuck Russia. Who even cares about their sports teams. Banned for good reason
Can’t their athletes still compete under an independent flag?
So we would've been 5th instead of 4th? Don't know if I could bear to keep living if that was the case.
Every historic russian Olympic result should be omitted given their rampant abuse of PEDs.
[The term is "per capita" and as a kiwi it is my plan a, b and c defense to all the slander in this thread](https://www.medalspercapita.com/#golds-per-capita:2024)
We come 8th
We win by a mile!
3 points gold, 2 points silver, 1 point bronze would be more or a half way compromise
That seems more disrespectful to me towards the dozens of countries that [can only send 1 or 2 athletes](https://totallympics.com/forums/topic/10598-summ) compared to countries bringing over 500 athletes to cover every event.
You do realise silver and bronze break gold ties right
When your one of the tallest and strongest countries in the world like Japan, thats easy pickings, lucky bastards they are
Should have been 3 for Japan in wrestling. Yui Susuki is the best pfp wrestler in the world. She was defeated by someone with a weight violation.
The leader looks unstoppable though, however yes fingers crossed
Anyone know what time the final race starts?
Shout out to our brethren across the ditch. They got more golds this year than Australia did in London and Rio.
Yep great race by the boys the Dutch guy is just so damn good
All over the age of 75 though 😅
Japanese\*
pretty sure they said 1 got dq'd
Just invade them and make New Zealand another state. Then we would be one gold medal below USA and two behind China.  Really cheese them both off. /s

  
Population of USA 345 million, China 1418 million and Australia and New Zealand combined only 31 million. /s
Oceanians UNITE!
We did once or twice
Unfortunately that means Japan will just claim Asia and then we're really screwed.
Not while we looked god in absolute terms.
Not during the swimming
NZ often punch well about their weight. Well done little bro.
Oh shit, ok, pivot to “per capita by geographic Anglo-settlement area” so we can count theirs, assuming this doesn’t put Canada and the US up.  In that case, just disavow the US as Anglo derived.
NZ with nearly 2 golds per million people is pretty impressive though
This guy does a great breakdown on the best way to see who performed best. As the 'per capita' tally has its own issues.  
  
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5fR\_\_LXDkRg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5fR__LXDkRg)
yessss, blind them with stats
Look at India's performance for their population lol.

The only reason we do well is we spend a lot of money in women's sports.
 A tiny population, of a pretty rich country, that in the eighties decided to spend a lot on Olympic sports.
Those cheese eating surrender monkeys!
Credit to NZ though - 9 gold medals is a solid result

Edit: 10 Gold Medals
9 gold from NZ is astounding really.
[is this thing on](https://www.medalspercapita.com/#golds-per-capita:2024)
The irony in all of this is she will be remembered, because the people whinging about her, bought more spotlight onto her. The haterds and trolls created the fact she will now be remembered forever in history.  I mean when the PM says congrats for having ago, i bet some of the athletes who competed in other minor sports (Judo and Taekwondo for example) and no knows who they are wish they did something to attract attention.
Do the roo!
Japan has a decent history of medals in Wrestling
Japan might be one of the best wrestling countries in the world. they’ve got 4x the gold medals in the sport as the next country this year
Russia are banned. Usually Russia and Japan are leading the wrestling medals by Japan got to pick up a few more.
It’s basically their national sport right? (Sumo is?)
The entire continent of Australia has a smaller population than Tokyo. Kinda wild when you think about it.
Australia also sent 450 athletes. The 3rd highest after the US and France. 

Don't get me wrong, congratulations is in order but when you see so many athletes, your odds to win increase significantly
lol
We spend about a third per athlete compared to the US, and about a quarter of the amount per athlete compared to China.

The US spends less public money than us per athlete, but the US team sponsorship money that goes to the players is enormous compared to the amount of sponsorship available to Aussie olympians, so their government doesn't need to spend as much. Their television networks and Nike have deeper pocket books than Uncle Toby's I guess.

I couldn't find any data online for how much Japan spends (other than prize money per medal - which is about double what we pay, but that's not really reflective of total spend).
The US would win that. The US government doesn’t fund Olympic athletes at all.
They Bradburied us
Oh no. Her performance will absolutely be cherished. I will be watching it with much joy and laughter for weeks to come. Also, I don't actually blame her for, nor really care where we place on the medal tally to be frank, hence the little '/s'. We would have come last in breaking even if we sent someone better (see the men's comp). It's just that the more I hear about her role in the selection process and her strategy to just pile on 'creative' goofy moves to game the scoring system (apparently judges penalise repetition), the more, as I said, I wish we just sent someone with more integrity. It's not like breaking is a humourless sport. We could have sent someone who did a kangaroo hop or two to go viral and still tried to actually break.
All countries do. America "Well, overall tally" a week ago. Even if you did it 'per person per meter" Japan is kicking some impressive ass. Look at India. Massive population but restricted space. Despite being sports mad, they kinda......mmm. Give a 1bil+ population the same spaces for sport as we have and the sporting culture it entails.....it'd just be a comp between the highest populated countries. We have a luxury the favours 'per capita'.
LNP failure to build a sovereign wealth fund off the back of massive natural resources and basically hand them to multinationals for free finally pays dividends
We’re gonna have to revoke your Reddit posting privileges…
I *know* that you just dropped Belgium to be funny... but I can't help myself. Is there a story here as to why Australians and Belgians don't get along?
It’s really hard to when people are unironically calling Americans being prideful of there accomplishment as akin to 1930s Germany lol
That does make sense, but the other side is China lol. If it was like GB or Japan or something I might even be a little excited... but the shaddy stuff the Chinese and Russian programs pull alone makes me want them to not succeed. Maybe that is my American nationalism kicking in, idk.
As an Australian, tbh I think America is portrayed as a country of extremes, because that's what people are interested in seeing. Actually going there, most of them are an  all all-right lot :)
Every time I talk to an Australian, I am reminded just how cool your slang is lol. "Kiwis" for New Zealanders is absolutely excellent. 

I think you raise an excellent point on the cultural differences in smack talk. It is difficult to portray any kind of fun back and forth through type anyways. I think a large part of my questions was curious if there was a real streak of American disdain in Australia, which it seems there isn't. Just the standard (fair) criticisms of our questionable at times weilding of super power status and the general dislike of our often unearned bravdo, haha. And I agree, let's *not* get into US Domestic politics lol. 

Not to get too sappy, but it is always ressuring to know that there is still an implicit agreement that countries that value democracy, free speech, due process etc still have eachothers backs. I know we just agreed no US politics, but a lot of us over here do worry that our allies may look at the shitshow and question if we still stand by those standards. So it's nice to know that the good will is not completely dried up yet.

Thanks for the well thought out response. Have a great week!
Most of you guys don’t hate us as long as we aren’t on Reddit 💀
Well said ….
wtf lol. 3 years ago Australians were fearing a war with China. Yeah, in the past we've chosen to stay neutral between China v America because that's what was in our economic interest.

But as of late, when push came to shove, we clearly sided with America as they best-matched our way of life. From most of our perspectivies, I think "Chinese influence" would be easy to spot, and downright called out.
I have never been to Australia, but I know Australians and I am pretty educated on geopolitical matters. Australia is NOT a Chinese puppet state lol. I'm pretty sure if you talked to the average Australian they would happily point out that they like core democratic principles and that they dislike totalitarianism just as much as Canadians or Americans.
This is coming from a sub suddenly obsessed with medals per capita
I mean honestly it does look pretty dumb for the US to be behind China in the table with only one less gold but heaps more silver and bronzes.
Looks like they won overall :)
Whomp whomp
This is exactly the reason why myself (and most of the world) wanted China to win. You guys just have a toxic hyper nationalist culture of boasting and belittling people from other nations. The fact that this time America did not get the most golds outright shows that perhaps their dominance is waining. 

China is equal to the USA on gold medals. Japan also beat Australia on the medal tally. However all the Chinese and Japanese I have met online have been great and respectful. They are proud of their nation, but don’t get cocky and endlessly boast about how they are “number 1” in everything or calling people “losers”. 

In the Winter Olympics Norway finished on top, however all the Norwegian people I have met at great and humble in victory. They don’t t have this American “in your face, we’re number one” nationalistic garbage. 

America almost feels like Germany in the 1930s- ie a hyper nationalist power on the verge of electing a right wing demagogue.
Wow talk about a bad winner. Like I said, I wish China had beaten the USA because you guys really need to be taught a lesson about sportsmanship. American culture just seems so vile.

As much as I don’t like China, they are much better victors than the cocky Americans. The Chinese celebrate their success without bragging or rubbing it in people’s noses that they are tied gold medal tally leaders.

The same goes for the Japanese. They beat Australia on the medal tally, but all the Japanese I have met are respectful. You don’t see Japanese boasting online about how they are “winning” etc.
You’re saying that as if this sub didn’t have several posts the first week specifically made to shit on the US in the first place when australia was up on medals. 

This whole act of shitting on other countries and then crying about their “arrogance” when the tables turn is pretty sad and pathetic honestly.
1 gold to tie (women’s basketball) and china has nothing left.

Any tiebreaker and we know which way it goes 😊
What was that?
US beat China, FYI.
Australia never escaped we just asked for it and got it
> your literal ally

Fuckin' lol. Let me know when you cunts do something besides drag us into a pointless war or try to install another space laser in the middle of the desert.
Nope

Just a strong support system
True, but the massive number of silvers we've gotten is awesome too. I'm actually glad the Japanese have done well also, seeing as the pandemic ruined their olympics a bit.
Exactly, my statement stands!
Idk bro we heard a lot of yapping out of you all about a week ago
Well that's no fun.
I thought Australia got gold in womens and men's skateboarding
Except they aren't completely banned, they complete at International Neutral Athletes
they can but it is significantly smaller, there are only 32 "Individual Neutral Athletes" which is the team for Russians and Belarusian athletes (they can't compete in team sports, only individuals and no-one who has publicly supported the war). In comparison, for Tokyo 2020, Russia sent 335 athletes and Belarus sent 101
As you should. Kiwi's should now be the country people talk about punching above there weight.
We need one per GDP too
Nah, I mean all countries....
No that’s stupid. What many competitions do is give first place x points, second place y points, and third place z points. Say, 3, 2, 1, or 25, 10, 5. It’s much more realistic because it actually puts value on still being one of the best (because there is value in that- a silver or bronze medal)
Bunch of 6’5 Shohei Ohtanis
Must've been sumo wrestling
The Japanese are known for their luck as a people.
The weight violation was before the finals not before the Japan match. They are weighed before the match and then allowed to compete. Blatant misinformation getting upvoted.
weight gain is common in sports like wrestling in the same day, she made the cut one that day, but did not the next one
That's our only shot now. Keirin we got silver and bronze. Feel like ever since that night we got 4 gold, we've JUST missed out on gold SO many times.

Anyway, fingers crossed for our girl in green and gold-> GEORGIA BAKER. If she can snag gold here, we'll be #3 again. It's the most giving race in the omnium so not all is lost hopefully.
I don't want Valente hurt, but I may be channeling a bit more Bradbury energy. It got Glaetzer the bronze.
We're 25 laps out of 80 down
ah shit damn, thought 'jap' was similar to 'brit' didn't know it was offensive, my bad.
We came 2nd and 3rd. the other japanese one was further behind. FUCKING RIP.
New Zealand can join at any time, we just don't want to
A long time ago yes. Plus I was mostly just joking and taking a jab at the poms
Fuck, not another spin-off of “greater asian co-prosperity sphere”.
Look they already tried that once and it didn’t end up too well for anyone involved.
Then we claim AUKUS
Except in boxing, ironically

\* may not actually be true.
Fuck it just pick whichever stat puts us on top.
per capita by constitutional inclusion.
and that's how gerrymandering won the Olympics kids
[The Randy Marsh approach](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xEdDXUM5uzk)
Yeah after a certain amount of population is reached in a country, the quality of its athletes much more so depends on the investments made into that sport and the athletes’ training.
>Compared to the top 3,

Ahh yes, those poor, impoverished top 3 world economic powerhouses with their tiny athletic programs.

Edit: lol i know you downvoted me, don't be upset you didn't read my comment and think before posting.
Just a shame the majority of the cheeses are amazing. (...I still maintain that washed rind cheeses smell like feet).
It’s their best ever Olympics!! Frothing for them too to be honest.
10 now - they're just ahead of Canada.
We should revisit NZ as the 7th state of Australia, 29 Gold sounds pretty good 😊
10 now
That is a huge result for NZ! Well done to them
Shouldve invade them and we wouldve been 3rd
10 aktualie
Honestly, we should merge governments just for the olympics. We would be unstoppable
Thanks guys. Pretty blown away by 10 golds at one games - bronze is usually more our speed. Appreciate you sticking it to all those bigger countries especially the Poms. Maybe it's time to revive the combined Olympic team...
Helps to have the Kayaking GOAT :-)
That thing also still say 7
never knew that, would have been nice to get 3rd however they did host last games so would still be feeling the affect we have one shot left in womens omnium, sitting 2nd race about to start
Commentary said they've never won less than 50% of the golds. Or maybe just medals total.
Aren’t like half their gold in wrestling?
this aint close to sumo though
sumo is a long way from the sport of wrestling. And Sumo might be a national support, but it's not as though every japanese child does it.
They sent 449 athletes and Rachel Gunn
Are Gina Reinhardt's $$ counted?
Also, university athletic programs in the US do a great deal of the development/training for most of the athletes. Revenue sports such as American football, basketball, and baseball earn the universities millions of $ which is then invested into the non-revenue sports such as swimming, T&F, etc. A unique system compared to most other countries.
I said funding, not government funding
I think that is a fair take. As long as people don't crucify her and make her life a living hell, I think it is understandable to be skeptical of her strategy or the selection process.
Way more accurate to look at funding over capita. Media has a hard on for it, but yeah like a largely populated 3rd world country is investing tonnes into its athletes…
Honestly, the strength of your Olympic training system matters so much more than the population.

China does so well now because the way they nurture new athletes and support them is more like USA or Aus has done so for decades
Lol no Belgium is fine, was purely drunk attempt to be funny
I think Australia generally doesn't have a strong hatred towards China as much as America has towards them. Even then I think most Australians would go for America over China/Russia haha. 

I think there must have been a misunderstanding -> this post is highlighting Japan taking over us to become 3rd. Nothing to do with 1st/2nd
China is so shady. They destabilized all of those secular democracies in South America and then invaded the middle east for business interests... Oh wait.
“avagoodweegend” 

[https://youtu.be/6nRXDvUONts?si=Vnmp9AtQ2-mCed-E](https://youtu.be/6nRXDvUONts?si=Vnmp9AtQ2-mCed-E)
Which is weird. Because Australia is in no way leading in medals per capita. Hell even if you don't count the tiny island nations you are still behind New Zealand, Jamaica and Hungary. And practically equal with the Netherlands (don't know how it will end up when you add the latest medals for both). 

Australia is doing better at the overall rankings than medals per capita to be honest.
Whatever makes ya feel better, buddy. US wins overall!
Really? I got the exact opposite impression. It was the Aussies with there immense cockiness who were constantly baiting Americans and frothing at the mouth for them to come second (like you said you were doing). Hold this L, truly.
Just reciprocating the energy y’all have been giving off since you jumped ahead in the swimming events. Either way it’s not that serious
Yeah I respected this sub with how much they were shitting on Americans the first week in the Olympics when they were ahead. Shit talk in sports is fun and I think Aussies like it like Americans do. 

But now playing the “woe is me” card and acting like the good guy is hilarious lol.
True lmao
Was it the girt tweet? It was the girt tweet wasn’t it?
Don't you mean "y'all"
Australia won gold in men's and women's park skateboarding, Japan won gold in men's and women's street skateboarding.
Thank you!
Aus too though! You guys aren't far behind on the rankings there. It's just fun when we occasionally get something we can brag to you guys about lol. Plus not like I earned them or had anything to do with them being won, I was just born here
Saint Lucia wins that pretty much always with a single gold with a population of around 200k
Thanks for your reasonable comment. I won’t add, I’ll take my downvotes like a silver medal loser
I know that, but she wasn't competing in her ideal weight class.

It's not a single day event where competitors who drop weight classes can just rehydrate a few kg's before the fight and be fine with it.

Every competitor needs to be able to sustain their weight over multiple days. Phogat couldn't do that because she is far below her natural weight. Her legal team even used that as a their basis in her appeal.

She shouldn't have competed in the 50kg class.
That's fine, i'd say it's even expected for a single day event where competitors are allowed to rehydrate and regain weight for that one day. 

But a competition over multiple days, you really need to be competing in your ideal weight to sustain that requirement. From what i've read, Phogat should be competing somewhere in the 53-56kg class.
And you were so close to another medal with RayGun......
We’ve gained at least 10 medals since then so you’re right.
haha yes i know
We do want to that's why 50k fly to Australia and never come back. Please annex us.
I know. Its in our constitution. Its a joke. 

But why are so many of you here?
We did join forces in 1908 and 1912 and competed as "australasia"
AUKUS isn't a continent.
Too much weights, not enough speedwork
Most medals by a country named "Australia"
Shortest marathon?
The women's tally?
That's the 'merican way...
Basically the difference between India and China now. 

Which i think is pretty impressive for China considering about 50 years ago they were at equal standings economically.
You got downvoted because your rebutting a point that guy your responding to never raised. What does a countries economy have to do with anything they said?
Am I a simpleton for not being able to go past a nice vintage english cheddar? I've tried so many cheeses but truly nothing beats it for me.
Oh I know! I love all cheese. The French make some great blues.
Yeh agreed, they're really doing great 👍 
Me too! Outside of getting smashed in the Bledislow every year, I always enjoy Aus/NZ matches across the major sporting codes - I would love to see them get more recognition from larger countries media outlets as well, although that's a long way off
I'll be ecstatic for NZ for every gold they win until it's their 18th (or Aussies got Silver)
They've overtaken Canada then, which is awesome. How good!
29 golds decided by roughly 32 million population - 1 gold per 1.1 million sounds pretty good 😅
The West island of New Zealand has a nice ring to it
Let's Ukraine NZ and get 10 golds
Damn that fizzled out. Seems like a complicated event
That’s doctor Raygun thankyouverymuch! /s
449 athletes and one deadset legend
While I can't control what others do, from what I've seen on social media, she has a lot of genuine fans and supporters if she's willing to accept that they maybe don't like her for her breaking skills, as she probably would have preferred. The Aussie legend status is waiting to be accepted by her if she's okay with maybe stepping down as 'Australia's best female breaker' and maybe encouraging some other girls to have a shot at the limelight.
Imagine if countries like India and China put as much in funding per capita.....thanks you definitely hit the nail.
I figured haha. Thanks for the reply!
Yeah I did think initially the intention was to point out the USA was about to take back first. Someone in r/Olympics mentioned Australia was angry about it, I took a peek and saw this post and just assumed lol. 

Regardless I appreciate you entertaining my questions. I hope to come visit your country one day. It looks beautiful!
Hey man, I did not pop in here to start some big political debate. We could go back and forth on all the shady things world governments have done historically... but I don't think that is productive. I would like to say, however, that *most* Americans are also pretty critical of our Government for some pretty terrible past transgressions, and that most people I know wish we used our position in the world to do more good. I enjoy that I live in a place that allows me to be critical of my government, just like in Australia, as that is not a garuntee in some places.

Have a great week!
To me, it's more about sticking it to the behemoth nations than being highest on the board.

The fact smaller nations do well per capita is something I can appreciate.
Exactly if you want to talk your shit then do it but stand by it, don’t act like a victim when you lose
Actually… Dominica wins with a population of 60k and 1 gold medal :)
Dominica is even smaller and won the women's triple jump.
The irony of switching from “THE US ORDERS BY TOTAL MEDALS INSTEAD OF TOTAL GOLDS WHICH IS THE ONLY UNIT THAT COUNTS” to “WELL WE ARE STILL BEATING THE US IF YOU CONVERT IT TO MEDALS PER CAPITA” is some of the funniest cope I’ve ever read in my life
but other athletes do it to and many succeed in losing the weight, she was short 100 gms
...participation?
ray gun is the only athlete  the world cares about lol
It's our best result ever so all Australians should be dancing...except her.  Please not her.
👋👋👋👋🤣🤣🤣🤣🤣
I feel like Baker is cooked.
Aussies were great imagine if we could get our hands on some Chinese beef burgers👌
What???? They literally mentioned economy first............ go to bed and get some sleep. 

They're implying the reason why we do well per capita is because we are a rich country who invested into sports programs. 

As if the top 3 countries aren't that way either.
Nah. We like what we like. I'm more than happy to indulge in pricey cheeses but one of my favorite snacks is a beetroot and cheese sandwich. Using kraft cheese slices :p 

(I do like a wedge of Wensleydale with cranberries too).
Fromage d'affinois blue is so, so good.

...that's my 'it's the first night of the Tour de France' cheese so I splurge a bit :p
Canadians right now: We're a winter nation!
Total medal count would be one medal per 440,000 people.  Combined AuNz would be second only to China for total medals!
Yeah not to mention cycling for last few days I dont know how they bloody do it
Dr. Rachael "Ray" Gunn OLY
I googled our funding vs other counties (impossible to really calculate when you look at the us college sports pipeline for example) but it basically had us 4th lol who woulda thunk it
China pays its athletes well and sets up academies for them as kids where they scout young kids to send to them. And they pick sports based on which can be mastered by training and repetition over just raw athletic talent. 

So I wouldn't be surprised if China is at the top when it comes to investment per actual medal, though obviously not per child in the country. The Chinese government obviously sees it as a status symbol so they're just trying to get as many golds as possible. Most governments dont really have anything to do with their Olympic team. 

But yeah China doesn't really do the method most other nations do where it just has youth athletics and endless competitions over a generation of children produce a few hundred athletes at the end by merit. So overall per capita expense I am sure is much lower.
ah glad that's sorted, nws! And we'd love to have you :))

Congrats on winning the olympics!
cya at Brisbane 2032 🤙
No worries my guy. I doubt there is anything to debate anyway. Just be aware that when you are casually calling China shady you're actively engaging in politics regardless of your intentions.
Per capita is a dumb comparison for sporting events.  If USA or China won 338/339 gold medals, and St.Lucia won 1/339, then St.Lucia would be winning.  It’s like saying In the World Cup, Croatia per capita performed better than Argentina so they are the winners.
In this event? Seems all competitors have competed primarily in 50kg class for the last 5+ years. Except for Phogat who has competed exclusively in the 53kg class since 2019.

100g is considerable when competitors take account for every single ounce during competition week. I don't think this was a case of accidentally drinking too much water or something, i think her physiology couldn't even allow her to maintain that weight. That was even used as the basis for her appeal.
It’s funny you mention that, but she is well known at the moment and the internet has seen people with more dubious starts go on to make $$ off their ill gained fifteen minutes of fame.

Anyway, long and short of it is that Raygun will probably go on to open an OF account and become a millionaire.
Can't wait till we get her and Bluey to recreate the iconic breaking routine for the 2032 Brisbane opening ceremony
any medal in omnium is impressive
Sorry dude, I thought you were the other guy.
Great idea! I'm using that as an excuse next year
2026 winter Olympics - watch out
No one tell them about NZ mountains >_>
Sure.. if you want to look at it like that. I don’t really think the concept of “winning” the Olympics should be a thing.

The number of gold medals any country takes home is impressive but the per capita haul makes it more impressive mathematically.
mma fighters gain and loose more weight
Can't say I'm familiar with it, but was going from 2nd to scoreless in the final race a complete tactical blunder?
Haha, all good homie 😅
MMA fighters cut for fight prep, weigh in 24hrs before the fight then immediately stack on 5kg before the fight even starts because they need to rehydrate.

They aren't competing over multiple days and having to maintain consistent weight day after day. Completely different requirements.
Fair to say she looked a little cooked and didn't have much energy left
