For me, it's been the 4x100m Women's Freestyle Relay in the pool, as well as following the Water Polo teams journey. Plus getting up early to see everyone on the River Seine in the opening ceremony.
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
I think Saya, not just because she said fuck, but because it had such a meaning with her brother's injury. 

I also loved that Noemie Fox was able to get our of her sister's shadow and win gold. Her reaction after winning felt very raw.
Saya Sakakibara's interview after she won gold in the BMX. Closely followed by the hockey player getting arrested for allegedly buying cocaine. Both quintessentially Aussie moments.
Skateboarding park event. 

Arisa and Keegan both had incredible runs, the teams were all supporting/ hugging each other and generally pumped for everyone as is typical for skaters. Double gold for AUS, absolute banger 

Basketball has been top notch this year as well, even though AUS didn’t get a medal

Edit: well they have now, love to see it!
Noemie Fox getting gold and her family jumping into the river to celebrate.
Women's climbing
Saya when she had to fucken go so just fucken went, or Arisa and the duck story.

Down to Earth legends being themselves after reaching the top of the world.
Kaylee McKeown in the post race interview saying she won't swear only to say shit at the end. Not the harshest of swears but still funny as she did promise not to and couldn't help herself. 

Think we've all done the same at one point.
Raygun
Mens tennis doubles.
Jess Hull’s silver in the 1500
It's not over yet.
Plus Naomie and Jess dad doing the commentary on Nine! You could hear how proud he was.
Skateboarding was a pleasant surprise - especially nice to see the 14 year old win a gold medal.

We've just won bronze in the women's basketball, so at least we get one more medal. Was a very good and close match.
Aus did just get a bronze medal in basketball…
Plus her dad doing the commentary on Nine!
Oce getting 3rd for bouldering is pretty amazing, hope we see more Aussies competing in '28!
The duck story was pretty good - hopefully she can take it to training.
Came last yet her performance will be remembered the most.
Right up there with Eddie the Eagle and Eric the Eel
First time since 1996 that we took the gold in that event
Fair enough - most of the Aussie's have finished up now with a few cycling events left.
Just saw the news after dinner! Haven’t seen the game yet as I was watching the men’s finals today. Stoked for the women’s team though, well deserved
Ngl, hope it's Oce again!
