[https://www.smh.com.au/sport/australia-win-silver-and-bronze-in-men-s-keirin-on-final-day-of-paris-competition-20240811-p5k1jc.html](https://www.smh.com.au/sport/australia-win-silver-and-bronze-in-men-s-keirin-on-final-day-of-paris-competition-20240811-p5k1jc.html)
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Nice Bradbury there to pick up bronze.
It won’t let me posts gifs on here.. but I have one of Glaetzer (3rd place), who they cut to after the race, and there was no audio / mic on him but I am 99% sure from lip reading he said ‘I did a Bradbury’.
Thanks for the spoiler tag, would never know what the result is based on the title...
I didnt know this sport but this was exciting! I felt like gold was really achievable and then the commentators said he was the legend in that sport.
If people are paying attention to sport and not memes, Glaetzer’s Bradbury medal will go down as legend.
Can someone tell me the purpose of the pace bike in the first 3 laps? Why do they need 3 laps of not racing
He did! His wife mentioned it in an interview.
he got 3 in these games alone, on their day anyone can win it but yeah reason they call him legend
Track cycling sprint events are always exciting. Lots of cat and mouse games, and then massive men and women laying down some serious power. Its one event I'll be trying to get tickets to in 2032, but velodromes have pretty limited seating so it'll be tough to get.
In this sort of race, it's generally a big disadvantage to be at the front, the others can save energy drafting  behind the leader and launch an attack near the end. The presence of the pace bike reduces this disadvantage and makes the race more even.
I have no idea as i'm no expert, something to do with pacing them a certain speed for the first 3  
True enthusiasts would know why
My assumption was that it's to differentiate the event from the sprint event. You need a bit more endurance because it's a few laps at high speed rather than just one.
My understanding is it forces the action, they’re doing 50km/h by the time the derny leaves so a high speed sprint finish is guaranteed. No track standing in keirin, just ridiculous speed.
