
She’s pretty famous around the world right now.   A marketing dream.
Imagine being a phd candidate/lecturer one minute, and being seen by over a billion the next. If raygun is an expert in breakdancing, she has to know how it would come across and surely this was deliberate.
Raygun yawning to Logistx's breakdance was something else though.
This is what happens when you take the piss out of yourself. Others also take the piss out of you 😂
Could anyone pick raygun out in a lineup? Everyone here who works in an office probably has 6-10 women that look almost exactly like her. Bradbury had that wacky hair and was marketable because he won gold.
She lost but won at the same time
Australia has such a good games we are just doing it for the lol’s at this point.
Raygun living her best life and getting famous just by having fun mad respect to her lmao
It’s not like she has anything to worry about it, college professors living an actual dream/fantasy. That is out of of reach for many
Andy Lee is Comparison Man

Raygun is Comparison Lady
Saw this somewhere else... But the name Napoleon Vegemite couldn't be more perfect for Raygunn
Right... so now Adele IS Ok with public shaming.
The Olympics are about being the best, pretty sure she isn’t the best from Australia. I see on the tv talk shows all the middle aged white women defending her for having a go. No one is talking about the young person (probably from a non-English background) that could actually do it, missing a chance.
It's crazy how fast the "cool" dancing became a complete joke. Basically overnight.
I’m looking forward to the TV miniseries ‘Raygun and The B Girls’
Albo literally said “the olympics is about having a go” 

Indirectly called the dance shit on tv
We shouldn't become a society that celebrates mediocrity
Dr kangaroodance Phd made sure breaking will never be accepted as a real sport by the public and she took the spotlight away from actual performers who worked their ass off to be there, just because she realized she couldn’t compete with them and decided to make a mockery of the whole discipline by flailing around randomly
Calling out someone that will lead to bullying. Would Adele have done this before her 100 pound weight loss journey?? Amazing how quickly things change
Imagine dedicating your life to studying "the cultural impact of breaking" and you're a 36 yr old white woman from Australia. 

Why are we giving out phds for this crap?
While I may not be a fan of her music I think Adele would be a fun person to have a chat with
Great, now we have a mascot for Brisbane
Why so mean?
All this money she’s about to get because of this fame I hope she gives back to the breaking community
I could unironically listen to Adele speak all day, let alone sing
Fuck sake....
Anna Mears is furious right now. She's coming for Adele the misogynistic keyboard warrior. Raygun was just having a go.
No shut up. We give a shit about sport in Australia, it’s such a great country to learn
She got the gold metal of people's hearts, not the pretentious one of "ur best in xxx" which means nothing after a day and gives you a max of $50k
I dnt get it. She dances better than i ever could.
Fuck Adele. Even her audience wasn't on board with "shitting themselves" with laughter at someone's expense. Rude cunt.
She pulled what basically can be defined as the opposite of a ‘Bradbury’. Generations from now on will refer to an embarrassing moment viewed by many as, pulling a Raygun
Absolutely. Now I get she might be feeling a little unloved or embarrassed or angry, but she should be looking to cash in. She has a little notoriety at the moment and should make hay while the sun shines.
Guarantee that ad agencies everywhere are 100% scrambling to write an like an Insurance ad or Telstra ad or something with her.
She embraced the Rebeca Black strategy to fame. Be so terrible at what you do they can't ignore you.
Like leftshark
Gonna make classes difficult unfortunately.
https://vt.tiktok.com/ZS2dcUWDx/



Deliberate? More like delusional. 
I've honestly met a lot of academics who are really out of touch with the everyday experience. Like really out of touch. And super deluded by their egos. I know this is a stereotype of academics but in my opinion it has more to do with how academia reproduces class privilege rather than the actual nature of academic endeavours.
I don't think she was imagining strangers hating her for a fun dance....
Very old school with nothing to back it up
When you’re getting dismantled by your opponent and you think you can taunt them by yawning, it’s simply called delusion.
Bradbury was also world class for years though
She’s a national icon but everyone knows she sucks at her passion
*Never want something too much, you might just get it*
And she didn't cry when she lost, storm off the stage and refuse to shake hands. She's handled all of this as well as she can.
Lol precisely. College professor and an international meme while being an Olympian


Honestly I think she is having fun out of all these. She even did that kangaroo hops at the start.
One of the criteria for promotion in academia is "evidence of an international profile", so she's got that going for her.
Love Adel and love her more since she supports Tottenham.
She’s Australian easy 100K for a lecturer/
And she is older ,I don’t care would
I hate the fact she reminds me of someone.
I thought she was better than this. I thought the 2 mins of Breaking I saw was cringe but they are people and they have feelings
Raygun shamed herself
She received no points at the Olympics, the fact that Raygun herself has publicly doubled down and said she knew she couldn’t compete to the skill level of the other competitors going into it so decided to go rogue and do her own thing that wasn’t meeting the known criteria for the competition being judged there. 
She isn’t some Aussie battler success story.
People keep saying this, and yet no ones provided any evidence of such a dancer existing (and good dancers always have something on YouTube/social media).

There are better breakdancers than her, but they aren't much better, and some of them attempted to qualify twice and failed

Breaking isn't that big in Australia and it's very male dominated world round.
Are you assuming there is a non-english background breaker that's better than her?

Why are you being weird about this?

It's a dancing comp for fucks sake. How invested are you actually? Do you only have an opinion because it's a popular meme
Breaking is like 50 years old trend
When was the last time you thought about breakdancing?
Well she certainly has had the greatest cultural impact on breaking....
If you knew anything about how phds are earned, you wouldn't have to ask such a dumb question.
She’s peak white woman main character.

Does a study about how the origins of breakdancing culture has been misrepresented and then goes and does routine that looks nothing like breakdancing. Literally appropriating a sub culture while showing you have zero understanding of what you’re telling everyone you know so much about.
So we give out the important ones ones too.

The slippery slope starts just after we get too selective about what qualifies
> why are we giving out phds

Something tells me you are not giving out PHDs to anyone.
Oh really? Okay, she's definitely Olympic calibre then.
I kinda get this, but by definition this would mean she was on top of the competition and winning then threw it away. Doing a RayGun would mean thinking you’re killing and ultimately being the worst and a laughing stock, but still somehow becoming the most successful.
she should reach out to collab with Celeste Barber, offer to be Adele's backup dancer (like Katy Perry got the Back Pack Kid to floss at her gig) and anyone else she can think to get a bag from.
If she leaned into people's perception of her it'd be hilarious. Like I could see an ad where she plays the fall guy for a competitor brand or something like that. I could definitely see a marketing team wanting to cash in on that global notoriety asap, it'd be viral for sure if it was executed well.
The issue is there are weird people that aren't laughing 

There are weirdos that are ANGRY about this.

No joke, people are trying this to international students (she is an academic).

People are so invested in being angry they will rage online about..... breakdancing.... not being taken seriously.... or something.
Slamming home the old quote, “If you can’t do, teach.”
Or that much easier. Imagine the ice breaker, 'you wanna see me brake this class'?
So she doesn’t actually teach breakdancing at university (unsurprisingly) from my googling, she actually teaches media studies ie how the media frames and presents stories. (Her research is on breakdancing and it’s culture which is adjacent but not something there would be enough interest in teaching I’m guessing). This story probably is an interesting case study in that.
I keep trying to get my head around the concept that people would go to Macquarie uni to study breakdancing..
Those who can't do, teach.
Correct, but she has to be aware she was that far behind I would have thought. Or maybe the Aus qualifying just didn't make it clear how far behind global talent they were.... I don't get it.
Don't take it so seriously, it's meant to be like banter
Im pretty sure it was supposed to be the move from Michael Jackson's Thriller video not "the kangaroo" lol.
Give me a fucking job I will help the government in spying and espionage
Worse I hate this spire of conversation of corruption ministers, it’s not fun for me either
Are you an international student?
would kindly drop some money? if you are a charirty. not all us are mosters in real ife
basically a PhD in cultural appropriation
Bradburry was atleast good enough to take advantage of the situation. He was keeping up with the fastest in the world. Raygun failed upwards. 
A lot of people need to concentrate on their own lives IMHO not others'.
There are always angry weirdos though.
And if you can’t teach, represent your country at the Olympics. I guess.
I just mean any class where you’re recognised by your students
They don’t, that’s her special interest area, not what she’s necessarily teaching. She’s likely teaching about cultural studies way more broadly.
I'm sure she realises how far behind she was, but there are people far behind in most olympic sports, and they don't normally get mocked internationally. Turns out its far more entertaining than watch someone dance badly than run relatively slowly or not climb very far.
Have you read about the interviews she has given?
There was definitely a moment where she pointed to the Australian coat of arms on her top and proceeded to kangaroo hop.
I'm pretty sure it was a kangaroo mate
Lmaoooooo oh shit you serious?



I've been thinking it's the "kang" cause she's you know, an Aussie representative. 🤣
Seriously, I know your type don’t make yourself a target of harassment and forget the girl ok?
Don't forget he also recovered from copping a speed skate to the thigh and had a tactic of waiting for the others to eat shit cos it had happened before.
Agreed!
I just cannot imagine a lamer thing to get angry about
About the strategy of creativity over athleticism? Yes.

I still can't believe she is that disconnected. It almost feels like this was a deliberate statement.

If so. Absolutely genius. On one level you need to appreciate what she has achieved
People don't seem to like the idea that she was in on the joke and taking the piss.
 Yea i saw the whole thing after, not just the picture. Can't believe she hopped around like a kangaroo.
Lay off the drugs mate.
Her PhD thesis was on how it's a bad idea to commodify breakdancing as a sport because it leads to things like a white mid 30s uni professor representing Australia at the Olympics so I feel she must know what she's doing and wants to point out how stupid it is
Waiting for the pivot to the "I was just pretending to be bad"
wish i had some seriously
