It was amazing that we could watch every sport live and every sport full reply on demand. Most of the channels had commentary too. Loved it. Saw so many weird sports that otherwise wouldn't be covered. 
This post has been marked as non-political. Please respect this by keeping the discussion on topic, and devoid of any political material. 

*I am a bot, and this action was performed automatically. Please [contact the moderators of this subreddit](/message/compose/?to=/r/australia) if you have any questions or concerns.*
Great post, Mike Sneesby.
Channel 7 did the same thing for Tokyo.
It’s been like this for the last several Olympics, and yet people are always confused/surprised/whinging. 
Not every sport is available on demand. In fact, a very limited selection.
Got to agree. But in this day and age, this is just an expectation now. Opens up viewership to so many smaller sports the main coverage just wouldn’t get to.
paid-for\* Channel 9 coverage. 

the free-to-air, on the other hand...
I watched Stan all Olympics, I didn't watch any of the "shows" just the coverage of events and I can only guess they are just reselling feeds from the IOC but damn it was brilliant. At one point I could choose from 3 table tennis games being played simultaneously. Best Olympics ever.
What you been SMOKING! Go check it out again, particularly other sports then your sport of choice. You see it differently then.
Oh was it?  I want to see multicamera next time.
Every sport I saw. There were like 30 channels.
Yeah. Watched archery and it was surprisingly enjoyable.
What do you mean? It was all free.
You could stream every sport live, for free. 
Wtf you could watch every sport whenever you wanted if it was live
No you don’t. 90% of the time the cameras are panning around setting up the next shot. Maybe on some team sports you could sit on a fixed wide shot? It’s not like motorsport where you can follow someone’s onboard. 
The archery was tense!
Nothing in life is free, someone paid for it ..

You wouldn't believe it but Telstra has a huge part in helping the coverage.
Did you have an option to switch off Tubby Taylor on the diving?
Yes. But also, he was fine. He was just a normal non-expert alongside a diving expert. Nobody cared about Todd Woodbridge calling the beach volleyball, did they?
Yes you could watch the generic international feed
If you watched via the event broadcast instead of the channel broadcast, then yes. Also, irrelevant to your first point
It was the same at the track cycling and one of the surfing duos.  There was an overpaid man who didn't know anything about the sport paired with a female former athlete/coach who knew what she was talking about.
That is just standard commentary. Experts are not necessarily good lead callers, they are there because of their specific experience. A lead caller is experienced in commentary, they lead the call so the expert can provide their expertise. Two pure experts without much commentary experience is a recipe for disaster. Although an expert can absolutely become a lead caller, with enough experience. Like Taylor. 
