
I have to say, everyone involved in this story seems to be a terrible person of the absolute tallest order.
Four Corners will have an episode tonight about the workplace culture and treatment of staff at Seven West Media (owners of Channel 7, The West Australian, and various other publications) - 8:30pm on ABC-TV
Another Seven L? Benny, Brucie, and now this
Kerry Stokes sending his best. He must be so proud.
Cunts cruising around in full daylight doing this shit for years and getting away with it.  Meanwhile, people get upset about a genocide happening right now and the screams of antisemitism start up immediately.
Most Israel or Gaza-related links get locked the instant they are posted.

Perhaps the keyword filter hasn't been filled out yet.
Great reminder that Jews do suffer forms of racism as the rest of us.
It's crazy that one of our three main commercial news organisations has just gone so bonkers - paying rapists for interviews with hookers, funding war criminals.  
 I noticed this trend in Australia over the last decade.  That is people at the very top of their professions, careers, roles as leaders, sportspeople, footballers etc etc all seem to want to take their successful achievement and use that as a licence to be nasty, racist and just simply mean spirited. Rather than reflect on their achievement and how they got to the top, instead they just want towards being the most horrible people on the planet. It appears to be a spectrum disorder or a simple childish delinquency "star shock syndrome" where they feel that they have to make fools of themselves by being nasty. Its just weird, I am sure that psychiatrists would have a name for this disorder.
This is Christmas come early for me, the gradual downfall of the West is a dream of mine. With the huge outcry and people boycotting them over their treatment of Adam Simpson on his way out and now something as big as this, this will be a deadly few months for them.

Ironic though that, since Seven West Media owns the only statewide daily WA newspaper and only Sunday newspaper, the majority of local newspapers in WA and also Perth Now (digital and print), I am now reliant on Murdoch's empire to go hard at them. Otherwise, who the hell is gonna report on this? We need media competition so badly in WA.
I did a bit of work with a media relations agency ~10 years ago in Adelaide and one day they had a big bitch session about 7 Adelaide and it sounded like a borderline Weinstein-level operation. They were complaining that one of their contacts had left the newsroom because the bloke running it had a new "plaything". I wish I remembered his name (they just used his first name) but they ended up rattling off a bunch of names of women this guy went through in the organisation.
This is just standard antisemitism, so it shouldn't be locked. Maybe the person saying what was alleged was a bully and completely tone deaf. Auerbach also doesn't seem to have had a Jewish education or seems to be that integrated into the community (based on his linkedin profile), more that he just happens to be technically Jewish.
Seeing as the text messages were sent well prior to October 7 2023, I don't think this has anything to do with that conflict.
Channel 7 has been shit for years.

They resurrected Pauline Hanson and now Ben Cousins on Dancing with the Stars, gave Wayne Carey of all people a job, Dave Koch and all his racist shit on Sunrise, BRS, and now this Lehrmann saga.

They just love working with problematic people.
.. Platforming neo-nazi paedophiles.. 
>>This is Christmas come early for me, the gradual downfall of the West is a dream of mine.

Soon, comrade, soon.
I always wondered whether Jane Doyle retired from news reading in Adelaide a couple of years ago or simply said "fuck this shitshow". I only ever see 7 News when visiting the parents and the latest experience made me double-take that the TV wasn't accidentally on Sky News.
Its the ego of the owners " my ego, opinions and money  will win" Elon Musk displays a lot of this syndrome.
Any submission which mentions "Israel" or "Gaza" is locked instantly, so there's no human intervention to make that sort of call.
Which famously only began on that date…
I know the Israel-Palestine conflict has been going on for years, but there had been a rise in anti-Semitism after that date. My point was that because it had been going for a while, it appears to be a different issue altogether.
