
Even if it's still not good by competitive standards, this performance was way better than the seizure she had at the event. The John Howard track suit they put her in made it look way more ridiculous.
The tennis coach outfit they put her in made it so much worse.
I sorta fused flashdance with MC Hammer shit
She studies cultural moments for a living. She became one. That's pretty impressive.

I work on aeroplanes for a living. I don't think I'll be able to pull the same trick...
This was a much better performance! At least we can see she does have some skillz

Seems to be having fun with it, so good on her.
This is Rayguns Gold moment
For a sport nobody gave two shits about a few days ago and won't again in another few days, it sure has upset a lot of people.
You know what, good on her for not letting all the negativity from the dunces get to her. She seems to be handling it well
This chick is a case study in revealing who cares far too much about random shit.

I watched some random get slaughtered in the women's 100m heats and no one rips on her lol. Girl was going backwards.
She sucks, but she does it with enthusiasm and an endearing dagginess, so good for her.
I know the world feels trolled but I can’t help but feel she’s serious? 

And world, have you met any Aussies? We piss take. It’s a fact.
Nice to see that the other athletes don’t feel like she’s ruined the Olympics like the doomsayers on here.
Fucken send it Raygun. Legend!
She represented with what she had and a brave woman who achieved what a lot of people never will. Congrats to her. I just see people on their couches complaining.
I’m glad she is owning it! And not locking her self in a room having a mental breakdown
I’m actually starting to like this woman.
It’ll be good if she can embrace it a bit. The internet pile on has gotten ridiculous.
I fucking love her so much
Why didn't she do that?!?
What a joke. There are legit great b-girls out there. This is not that. Every sport needs a minimum standard to go the olympics. It is like sending a skateboarder that cant hit a 360
Someone please make it stop.
I just want to say RayGun has given this household so much joy.
Thank you RayGun.
Now i know they are F#$ing with us
Getting some Ricky Gervais Office vibes
Is this supposed to be good or bad?
She saved her best for the closing ceremony celebrations.
I wouldn't say she was olympic-caliber, but this little street show was definitely an improvement on her main event
Ride the meme raygun. You're the new hawk-toua girl.
I hop she has hired a publicist. If she embraces the joke she could get a few gigs out of this and make a few bucks.
She looks better here than during the competition. The ridiculous Aus tracksuit didn't help.

Still not sure why we chose breakdancing instead of a sport with pre-established governing bodies.
Where the fuck was this energy when she was on stage.

Big rip
The only time breakdancing was in the Olympics and she cemented herself as a meme for all time.
Still awful.
Just as bad, a middle aged academic on a tax payer funded junket taking a spot a young kid could have had representing their country is a disgrace.

The fact she can brush it off with accusations of misogyny highlights her understanding of how to rort the system to her advantage.

The Australian Olympic committee has a real part in this too, they knew how bad she was, it was pointless sending her
IDK I'm kinda into it
They not doing breakdancing at next Olympics anymore. Raygun destroyed the sport lol
cringe ... such cringe
She’s become a parody of herself
Please just stop
It just goes to show, if you believe in yourself you can achieve anything.

This is a reminder folks. Reach for the stars. Follow your dreams. Strive for success.

You are your best self.
I have to thank Raygun for revealing to me another Aus subreddit I never knew existed.  r/australian  - it's been around for 15 years but I've never seen it.  I only found it because I think 8 out of 10 threads are concerning Raygun.  
Not sure I'll subscribe though.
This has to be the most positively the worst display of *Attempted* break dancing. This is embarrassing.
If she produce this routine on the actual day, she would have gotten 3-points.
Finally break dancing! 💃🏻
Dead set legend.
As an old school hip hop lover, I thought the tracksuits were on point! I'm loving the confidence, too - top rock and foot work, with an ode to Bandit (Blueys Dad) with the "sprinkler", lol.

It's the same with her style - she's 36 year old academic; can't really say I was expecting massive power moves. It's like some of the other breakdancing styles, like pop lockers, etc. - some might say these styles are crap, too but I think the biggest thing is people commenting negatively that probably very few know anything about.
Finding all of this hilarious: the correct reaction 

Being angry or upset: pitifully lame
Almost 100% convinced it was a troll at this point...
This is cringe.
She’s living her best life. Good on her for having a go, fuck the haters and news corp
So basically she has a better sense of humour than those hating on her do, confirmed!
To me this kind of reinforces that maybe she knew exactly what she was doing with her performance. She has a PhD in cultural movements and did her dissertation on the breakdance scene. Why not qualify for the olympics, then put on a hilariously bad performance and prove a hypothesis about how memes go viral?
Kiwi here. Just wanna say that I loved her outfit - it was giving me ‘so uncool that it’s cool’ vibes. I think that you should celebrate Raygun and give her National Treasure status. One of the highlights of the Olympics for me.
Nah she’s still shit
Can someone make her go away? Its just too much second hand embarrassment.
Read the room olympians
Garbage. This is exactly what I thought this clown would be like. This is some serious disrespect to the real b-boys/girls who can actually breakdance.
what an embarrassment.
Main character vibes, for sure.
I feel sad for her.  She is a little bit shit.
Quit while you’re ahead.
When mediocrity is celebrated. I’m sure she doesn’t realise people are laughing at her, not with her.
She is awesome, brave and courageous.
Can't believe the "glad she's not getting down by the hate" and "She's just living her best life" takes in this thread.

Y'all hate politicians and their nepotism, corruption etc, but happily cheer on this person that got in because of their association with the Australian governing body for selection (Ball room dancing btw).

I won't go so far as to call this a disgrace to sports because corruption is rife throughout it, and there's no reason to call for this person's public lynching (it's "only" sport after all), but this is just sad for the young Australian b-girls and b-boys out there learning their craft knowing that their chance at competing at a global event could be taken away, and the person taking it away could be celebrated because "vibes".

It's like telling Titmus or McKeon nah we're not sending you, our fastest swimmers, we're sending the head of Australian swimming's wife because memes.
I would hazard a guess that most of the audience there could do that as well if not better.
Who slept with who to get this in the olympics
Funny stuff but kinda sad this is the best we have
Woman bad
Counter point, who cares???
She chose the outfit btw
She chose to wear that.
We don't have to pay for that one too, do we?
Not with that attitude 
There's some who claim this is all an elaborate hoax, and she's just putting her phD to the test. Honestly the more I see of her the more I believe it.
You need to pick your self up by your wings and get out and fly
You weren't in Cairns last night were you?
>I don't think I'll be able to pull the same trick...

Not more than once... and I've already seen Raygun dance twice now.
> I work on aeroplanes for a living. I don't think I'll be able to pull the same trick...

Hmm, wingsuits, maybe?
Leave a few bolts untightened and watch your stars change!
Love that take
But i love your airplane facts Max
Anything and anyone can be an aeroplane given enough thrust. Dont give up on your dreams mate
Stay positive, I think you can become an aeroplane if you try hard
How weird would it be to turn up in the very textbook you are studying?
/r/ShittyAskFlying helps!
There's more to come. This is her warmup routine for the Paralympics
Be… become an aeroplane….?
She did the head spinny thing in the first performance. I thought it was pretty clear she knew some things.
engadine mcdonalds moment
I dont think anyone got upset. She just became a meme.
People are having fun taking the piss. Not seeing much upset.
I think shes embracing the meme. Shes on a whole heap of ticktoks atm
The Australian chef de mission said attacks on Raygun are misogynistic.   Adele said on stage she and her friends had been pissing themselves laughing for 24 hours.  She has to embrace it as funny and not take the criticism seriously.   Some people will be mean but most find it funny.

She was trying to be funny, she dressed like a gym teacher and she did kangaroo hops.
It's kinda like a reverse Streisand Effect? kinda?
I’m with you, this is dance for fun, who cares about measuring it’s merit.
Except digging into the origins of the commission and how all this came about, it’s looking like she might be treading along with main character syndrome. And we like nothing more than cutting people back down when they extend their heads too far.
I think plenty of people rip on her. One of the reels that came up in my doomscrollfeed was framing these 2 moments as "this is what happens when skill/prowess is not the metric used to select olympic competitors" 

That random "runner" was apparently the niece of someone on the selection committee of her country... Not sure why anyone would select their basically un-athletic niece to compete in *the olympics* even if they are related.. but I guess some men just want to watch the world burn.
So many people who suddenly give af about the integrity of breakdancing! It's crazy! I never realised it was so popular amongst boomers who haven't danced in 20 years! On the other hand so many others are using it to just write off breakdancing entirely.

Not to mention the fucking full frontal assault on arts education that's happening because of her work now. Fuck me.

It infuriates me. Anything to disavow education right? Anything to shit on the idea of arts and humanities study as a whole, as if they don't get shit on incessantly already. As a high school teacher my students see these attitudes and just feel awful about their interests if it isn't STEM. Way to go.

It's old hat, it's boring and yet people think they're being unique for their takes on tertiary arts education once again. Mindnumbing stuff.

Is she good? No. Does it really matter? Also no.
Are you referring to the marathon runner from the Solomons who got an entry to the 100m sprint? 

Apparently there are some pissed off sprinters in the Solomons who wonder how that happened. 

But yes, people care too much about this Raygun debacle. Very much agreed on that.
Yep, I think it's due to some weird expectations that they feel personally embarrassed or attacked if someone does badly at their sport.

What most people don't see at the Olympics are there are an absolute shedload of people who go with pretty low expectations of medalling, and never make it through the heats.
Unless you watch the heats you'll never know most of the time. The morning breakfast news doesn't say 'we won two golds in the canoe slalom overnight, but we absolutely shit the bed at fencing'. Winning means a lot, but it's not everything. Good on the people who were brave enough to turn up for their country
A lot of people have a chip on their shoulder when it comes to break dancing in the Olympics thinking it's something childish from the 90's with no appreciation of how far it's come and how involved it is. To them, Ray Gun is the shinning example of why it shouldn't be considered a sport.

So people are ragging on her not because she was outclassed horrendously (she was), but also because they don't value the sport and misplacing their made-up aggrevances on her.
> I watched some random get slaughtered in the women's 100m heats and no one rips on her lol.

We don't begrudge competitors who aren't taking the piss.
Lots of the early heat winners in the men’s swimming wouldn’t even place in the girls division at my kids swimming carnivals.
I would say this sums up quite a lot of the formal competitive breaking in Australia.
yeah she should get a medal for good sportsmanship or effort or something like that right?
Disagree
As an Australian tax payer, while I love our piss-taking culture, I do not appreciate doing it on tax payer expense simply for a social study lecturer to produce more sophisticated papers about the cultural moment her trolling generated. (If that’s indeed the underlying intention like many suspect)

Edit: this is not the prevalent sentiment I guess 😀
They all want to get a video of the meme in real life. Raygun is the most famous Aussie athlete.
Me too! Living your best life right! ✨️
Someone pointed out on another thread that, given the counter-cultural status of breakdancing in Australia, it's reasonably likely none of the people you're thinking of would;  
a) Want to breakdance at an event like the Olympics (which is increasingly mired in big money, big establishment vibes).  
b) Want to take part in the "official" breakdancing scene in Aus (which has been taken over by the Ballroom Dancing organisation, since 2018).  
c) Pass the recreational drug tests anyway (not judging here).
Funilly enough there were skateboarders who could barely make it to the top of the bowl, I'm thinking that 49yo South African. Didn't seem to get anywhere near as much shit as Raygun.
With that attitude we would have never had Eric The Eel at Sydney in 2000, and that’s just not worth thinking about.
Every sport does have a minimum standard, that's what qualifiers are for.
Australia was only there because Oceania had a guaranteed spot. We would not have qualified otherwise.
360? That's like a skateboarder that can only do a kickflip while stationary.
South Africa has left the chat
Can you tell me about breakdancing? In your own words tell me what breakdancing is, what the moves are about, a bit about the culture a d who your fave performers are?
But she has a PHD in what she is doing!
lol so you get to set the bar of what a b-girl or skateboarder is?  can you do a 360?  i doubt it, yet here you are on the internet judging others and telling them they aren't what they actually are.
36 is middle aged?

Not arguing with anything else you’ve said but all of a sudden I’m feeling like Im one step out of the grave.
The AOC *doesn’t select athletes*.

It relies on the individual sporting bodies to hold their own qualifiers (or for their athletes to participate wherever said events might be). 

Individual sports set their own standards. The AOC has no role to play in gatekeeping athletes once they’ve qualified (unless they do something illegal).
She won the qualifying oceanic tournament. I'm not sure what else she was meant to do?
Exactly. Plus who the fuck endorsed the ballet club with the right to choose the break dancers
Why didn't any of those you say are better than her win the qualifier she won to get her place?
Fuck off with the “middle aged”. 

She qualified, legit or not. If you aren’t able to beat Raygun in qualifiers, you also don’t deserve to be at the Olympic Games
Your comment is giving me "wouldn't recognise misogyny if it hit you in the face" vibes.

You're calling her "middle aged" whilst others in this thread retort she must have "slept her way there". You can lament that we didn't send someone capable of medaling without attacking her age, as if women have all had it after 25. One of the other women's competitors was older and did great.
She won in the qualifiers, the others didn't
She qualified through the process that the IOC stipulated.

Where is the young kid your referring to? Are they in the room with us right now? More importantly, were they at the Oceania Breakdancing Championships which is how they would of qualified?

Given that all the Australian breakers who went to the international qualifiers essentially came last I think the AOC are very aware that without a guaranteed spot for Oceania, Australia would not have qualified at all.
I don’t see any young up and coming breakdance women complaining. Only boomer men lol. She wasn’t great, but she was the best nominee from the country. There are lots of countries who put forward their best and have no hope of winning. No need to make it so serious. 

Also breakdancing in Australia is pretty counter cultural, all likelihood any young women who could have come forward had no interest in competing in the Olympics or didn’t want to do the drug tests.
That's exactly the point. Do you think someone does the sprinkler to be cool?
It also goes to show that if you don’t invest in a sport at all you don’t attract high achieving athletes.
That's the conservative Aus subreddit, generally.

Personally stay well away.
That place is a shithole, would avoid if I were you.
Don’t look darling.
Maybe the real b-boys/girls should've actually tried out then
woah fellas we got a really fun guy over here sound the alarms! make way for the life of the party
There is no evidence of corruption. Just a small sport without much infrastructure to find and train the best people.
yikes.
No. It's who we sent, not the best we have. 
I think that's a bit stiff. She's not up to the standard of the other dancers by astronomical units and a bit delusional and full of herself. But that doesn't make her a bad person.
Bro what? You're on Reddit
Judging by the fact you clicked on the thread and replied..  You?
You
Lol why even be here then dude?
I care!
I find this hard to believe, because the kid who competed for us in the boys comp wore the same thing. Given the kid is like 16 there’s no way on earth he’d have chosen to wear that in public if he had the option not to.
Everyone keeps saying that. It doesn’t make a difference who chose it
No she didn’t this was the official Australian Olympic uniform provided to both break dancers. She said she was excited to wear it especially because it has indigenous Australian representation on the sleeves. 
Not judging by the number of others wearing the same
Video suggests thats just the Aus closing ceremony get up.
Altitude*
Underrated comment. Attitude is the term used for a plane’s positioning on its axes.
Do you know if I had a problem with the way that break dancing was co-opted by the World Dancesport Federation ahead of the actual community involved in the sport, and I wanted to de-legitimise them/troll them, falling on my sword by going full send silly white lady would be one way to do it....
I’m starting to believe it too. She went totally viral and has TikTok copycats within a day and I’ve seen pop culture subs talking about the Halloween costumes. Could be a social experiment.
It is serious four-dimensional chess if so
considering she’s released a paper stating her negative views on breaking being in the Olympics it seems pretty clear she was taking the piss
Well, if someone became an aeroplane, I want to know about it
What happened in cairns?
People are absolutely upset. Deeply offended on behalf of their favourite female breakdancers who missed out on this opportunity. 
Everyone in Australia felt a massive cultural cringe, but we're used to that.
Nah, there are absolutely people who are upset. Not that you should pay them any attention.

Most people aren't, but there are the same old people who want to bring gender politics or shitting on academia into this who are out there being **really mad** about this.
Misogynistic? What a load of shit. Can we not criticise a woman without it being sexist? I don't give a shit if she's male, female, or neither. You put in a performance like that and you're going to cop some criticism. They don't need to turn everything into some stupid war between the sexes.
How is it misogynistic when we’re comparing her to other women who competed? She literally got 0 points.
People have been making personal attacks. So I think that’s what they’re talking about, not that people found it funny.
It's pretty impressive how your average Australian can be so breathtakingly ignorant about and condescending to even the most uncontroversial fields within the humanities.
Yeah the amount of "fuck all academics and higher education" comments has been rather revealing. We do love our anti-intellectualism in Australia.
Nah it’s because she looked funny. No armchair psychology needed, it’s not complicated. The same people making fun of her praised the 16 year old Aussie boy because he looked good doing his thing.
Saying Raygun is an example for why it shouldn’t be a sport would make sense if she won, but she didn’t get a single point.
To preface, I’ve seen plenty of white people dance with style, but raygun just looks so white when she dances
I reckon she represented Australian culture, and took the piss out of American culture... f'in posers
>If that’s indeed the underlying intention

Time to touch some grass
She gave me a great laugh, tax well spent in my opinion.
Good on her for embracing it with good humour.
Add to this, it costs money to qualify. You’ve got to get to where the qualifying comp is held and pay for accommodation while you’re there. I’m also assuming there’s an entry fee of some sort. I’m assuming that the more talented breakdancers are young and probably don’t have the spare cash for that sort of thing, even if the cringe factor wasn’t off putting.
There are videos of other women competing for the position, who are considerably more athletic and skillful. That kind of defeats this hypothetical "all the good ones are antiheroes" argument. 

Same with the bloke's entry - he performed in line with expectations rather than be just some shlub because they'll take whoever they can.
Because he is a good skater.. age shouldn't matter.
At least he could ride the skateboard
Those can be gamed.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_Swaney

> Swaney achieved this by attending competitions with fewer than thirty participants, with one event in China having fifteen (in which she placed thirteenth). Thirteen of her top 30 finishes were a result of her showing up, not falling, and recording a score.

The video is pretty funny. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YKOlMUyOEDc
So many people being so confidently incorrect about her. We literally had a guaranteed spot, and she only had to compete against a dozen other women who were members of a ballroom dancing organisation to get her spot. They were literally just hoping that one of those dozen women would be an Olympic standard breaker, and this was the best of that group.
Except for when the Olympics just gives free entries - look up the Solomon Islands 100m sprinter for example
>can you do a 360?

Well I don’t think that guy is an Olympic skateboarder so I’m not sure what your point is
Well, Homer is meant to be 36. Hits a lot different when you are past that age.
As a fellow 36 year old: Fucking hell 😂
Maybe....it's a stretch,  but you get my point she looked like a soccer mom  doing a bad skit for the year end review
Probably because most people's health is so bad that it has reduced their life expectancy from over prioritising their careers or lack thereof. Reduces the average middle age.LMAO

 It is without taking into account culture views on ages
I believe that Raygun was part of the Ballroom dancing association that took control of the selection process, putting actual break dancing organisations offside with the process
Maybe they didn't know the qualifier existed, maybe they couldn't afford to attend it.  Maybe they didn't know the judges well enough, wink wink. Lots of reasons and not all of them are honest.

She was definitely in a position to find and promote better talent.
If I recall correctly, only 15 people turned up to the qualifiers. Seems sus so few people turned up to it.
Maybe she would have served the country better by helping one of those kids to fill out the myriad of forms & grant applications instead of going herself
Imagine you're a really great skateboarder when they've just added it to the Olympics and the trials are being held by a rollerskating club with only about a dozen female competitors who all want to go to the Olympics and have no incentive to advertise it. Would you hear about that? Have the time and money to travel to compete?

The qualifiers were run by a ballroom dancing association she was already a member of, and those members were the only ones who competed to qualify. They were just hoping they already had an Olympic level breaker in the dozen, and now we know they didn't.
The number of times people have brought up her age..  we are so ridiculously agist it's disgusting.. you'd think once you're not in your 20s anymore you basically might as well give up on life and go rott in the suburbs.
"legit or not". If you aren't able to beat her in the qualifiers that you were illegitimately kept out of competing in, then you don't deserve to be at the Olympic games. Rational take.  
  
"If you couldn't beat her in the boxing qualifiers, legit or not, you didn't deserve to go to the Olympics. I don't want to hear that she had plaster in her gloves." See how dumb that sounds? Just as some people were going to criticise her no matter what, some of you are just defending her no matter what.
Watching this thing makes me embarrassed for them, I can solve this by taking the simple action of not watching or even just ignoring the whole thing but no!  I must continue and then complain!

(The irony of my reading comments complaining and then complaining about it is not lost on me.)
Kind of hard when she’s everywhere and overshadows other olympians. I shouldn’t be so harsh, I don’t know how to break dance either
Prove it
Nuh uh
Nuh uh
To tell you there's more important things in life than worrying about how a woman danced at the Olympics. You got no skin in this game
Why do you care though
It changes the narrative from "they screwed her over" to "she chose to represent the culture", one victimises her, the other she's owning it.
I liked the indigenous print on our uniforms. But the green on green tracksuit was unsuitable for breakdancing imo.
>  Australian Olympic uniform provided to both break dancers

That's the stupid thing to me, give them a uniform that reflects what they are performing in. 

Imagine if they gave the AUS Basketball team a cricket outfit.
Woke up
They all just happened to “choose” the same thing lol
Technically, you both made aeroplane jokes. Well done
Fun fact "Attitude" is the term used to refer to the aircraft's nose position on the horizon. It's an i credibly important concept and the key to flying.

So the person before you may have already been making a aviation pun or they did so unintentionally lol.
Right?? Like damn this brought back breakdancing in the absolute worst way after no one thought about it for years  💀
There are a bunch of niche sport thats have been corporatised or 'taken over' like this and the actual communities pushed out of being able to use the name/organise events.

I wasnt aware that it had happened in breakdancing but I am not suprised. 'Cheerleading' in the US (whatever you might think of it) has been taken over by a single company that sells the uniforms&equipment runs every comp, owns every gym and locks out anyone who doesnt follow their rules from participating.
An abstract from one of her papers reads “to critically examine how the capacities of bodies are constituted and shaped in Sydney’s breakdancing scene, and to also locate the potentiality for moments of transgression”
It'll definitely be retconned to be a social experiment.
Big Captain Holt energy for sure. For now though, she's just goofin
Chopper crashed into the roof of a hotel
I guarantee you that meme history will remember her fondly and she will become a certified Aussie legend through the passage of time.
Gender politics...? Sounds like those people are always upset...
You obviously didn't see her phd thesis. 

Iirc it's to the effect of "Deterritorializing gender in the Sydney breakdancing scene"

Of course there will be people calling misogyny when the target writes papers like that
Hate to break it to you, but while you may have been engaging in legitimate criticism of the quality of her performance, others have in fact resorted to gendered slurs  to advance hateful agendas (this is the internet, you know how low people can go). These do need to be shown the door because that's the stuff that fuels a culture of disrespect.
Is he? Barely made it to the lip of the bowl and didn't complete a single run. Crashed out immediately.

There are duds in lots of events at the Olympics unfortunately for Raygun breaking is one where the difference in quality is very apparent and her artistic choices left a lot to be desired.
To give the illusion that breaking is a truly international sport (when in fact there are only 5 Olympic nations that have established professional competitions) the IOC stipulated that one place would be held for a representative from each continent. She got the spot for Oceania. Australia would have not of qualified at all otherwise. She didn’t game the system, but the IOC tried to.
Raygun competed against just 12 other Australians to qualify.
I was still playing top level sport for my state at 36 ffs. We had a 42 year old woman run 10th in the world at the marathon a few days ago. Another 42 year old won his 5th gold medal in a row.
Life expectancy has increased dramatically over the last hundred years. 

Cultural views haven’t caught up with reality if 36 is seen as middle aged.
AUSBreak co-hosted the event along with DanceSport Australia (ballroom dancing association). Raygun won her selection but I think the actual issue comes from the fact we shouldn't have had the opportunity for a qualification in the first place. The other girls weren't able to qualify through alternate routes so it was clearly a skill issue.
15 women. Why do you find that “sus”?
What grants are you referring to?
And whose fault is that? Their own or the fact the Internet memed them overnight. If people didn't do that they would have been forgotten almost immediately following the event, now though it's going to take a lot longer.
Can you provide proof of this?
I don't remember seeing other athletes choosing not to wear the baggy greens. Maybe she was just being compliant?
Either way, that was the official uniform. If people didn’t like the design that not her fault.
Surely you can't be serious.
Thanks for adding depth to quality jokes 👍
I see you’ve added some right rudder to stabilise this conversation.
A lot of people think Lana Wachowski purposely handcrafted Matrix Resurrections to stop it from becoming a franchise. It's poisoned the well so expertly that bringing it back is extremely hard. The movie sucks but viewed through the lens of making it worthless to WB, it's actually really competently made.

RayGun's routine, viewed through that lens, appears similarly expertly concocted. She was ranked near the bottom anyway, so there's no way she'd get to the finals. If she was mediocre we woudn't be talking about it.
As I understand it the ballroom dancing people (WDF) have been trying to get ballroom into the Olympics for ages to get their own little slice of the pie/attention, and it was never working out, but they pitched Breaking for younger audiences and got it through and the people who actually run breaking comps were like, wtf?!
This happened with roller derby and the fun got completely sucked out of it when leagues got “serious.”
Omg that’s horrible!
Oh I agree with you. I’m all about Raygun. 
Yup appreciate the correction. Goes to show that my bias and demographic is showing
It's just that there are so many break dancers in Australia, yet only 15 turned up. Seems like either a boycott by break dancers due to ballroom dancing Australia taking over or ballroom dancing simply didn't advertise the qualifiers to actual break dancers.

Erk, I feel like I'm wearing a tin foil hat with this one however it just doesn't seem right that someone that bad at break dancing represented us instead of someone who put the effort in to get good.

Sure I could be reading too much into it, but if I was going to bet money on it I'd go with some kind of corruption being involved.
Plenty didnt wear it when they were actually competing.

Swimmers, sprinters etc etc.
Cirrus *
I am serious, and don’t call me Shirley.
How did you guess my name?
Went right over my head
👍
