Greek Australians (Greek: Ελληνοαυστραλοί, romanized: Ellinoafstralí) are Australians of Greek ancestry. Greek Australians are one of the largest groups within the global Greek diaspora. As per the 2021 Australian census, 424,750 people stated that they had Greek ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), comprising 1.7% of the Australian population. At the 2021 census, 92,314 Australian residents were born in Greece.
Greek immigration to Australia has been one of the largest migratory flows in the history of Australia, especially after World War II and the Greek Civil War. The flow of migrants from Greece increased slightly in 2015 due to the economic crisis in Greece, with Australia as one of the main destinations for departing Greeks, mainly to Melbourne, where the Greek Australian community is most deeply established.
88% of Greek Australians speak Greek and 91% are Christians and members of the Greek Orthodox Church.
Australia and Greece have a close bilateral relationship based on historical ties and the rich contribution of Greek Australians to Australian society. In 2019, the export of Australian services to Greece was valued at $92 million, while services imports from Greece totalled $750 million. Australia's stock of investment in Greece in 2019 totalled $481 million, while investment in Australia from Greece was $192 million.

History
Early Greek immigration
Greek immigration to Australia began in the early colonial period in the 19th century. The first known Greeks arrived in 1829. These Greeks were seven sailors, convicted of piracy by a British naval court, and were sentenced to transportation to New South Wales. Though they were eventually pardoned, two of those seven Greeks stayed and settled in the country. One settled on the Monaro Plains in Southern New South Wales and one at Picton near Sydney. Their names were Ghikas Bulgaris known as Jigger Bulgari, and Andonis Manolis. Jigger Bulgari married an Irish woman, and they had many children. Jigger was buried at Nimmitabel Pioneer Cemetery. The Hellenic Club of Canberra laid a commemorative marble plaque over his resting place around 2000. Andonis Manolis' grave is in the old cemetery at Mittagong. The first known free Greek migrant to Australia was Katerina Georgia Plessos (1809–1907), who arrived in Sydney with her husband Major James Crummer in 1835. They married in 1827 on the island of Kalamos where Crummer, the island's commandant, met the young refugee from the Greek independence wars. In her youth, she must have been one of the last living people to speak to Lord Byron. They lived in Sydney, Newcastle and Port Macquarie. They had 11 children. The first wave of free Hellenic migrants commenced in the 1850s, and continued through the end of the 19th century, prompted in part by the recent discovery of gold in the country.

20th-century Greek immigration
From the last decade of the 19th century until World War I, the number of Greeks immigrating to Australia increased steadily and Hellenic communities were reasonably well established in Melbourne and Sydney at this time. The Greek language press began in Australia and in 1913, Australia had the first Greek weekly newspaper called Afstralia that was published in Melbourne.
Anna Perivolaris was a leading organiser of Greek culture in Sydney in the 1920s until she was head hunted to organise a Greek after school club in Perth.
There was a significant population of Greeks in Australia during World War I, especially from the Greek islands, which led to the community being heavily monitored and counted in a 'secret census' in 1916, due to questions of Greek loyalty as Greece was initially neutral during the war. Later the Greeks were raising money for the Greek Government in exile. 
After the changes in Greece from the mid 1970s, including the fall of the Papadopoulos regime in 1974 and the formal inclusion of Greece into the European Union, Greek immigration to Australia has slowed since the 1971 peak of 160,200 arrivals. Within Australia, the Greek immigrants have been "extremely well organised socially and politically", with approximately 600 Greek organisations in the country by 1973, and immigrants have strived to maintain their faith and cultural identity.
By comparison, the Greek Cypriot community in Australia doubled following the Invasion of Cyprus by Turkey following a campaign of ethnic cleansing in 1974.

21st-century Greek immigration
Since the year 2000, Greek immigration to Australia has slowed down. As the economic crisis in Greece grew, the opportunities for temporary resident Greek Australians abroad were limited.
In the early 2010s, there has been an increase of Greek immigration flows to Australia due to unemployment, among other issues, because of the economic crisis in Greece. This has led to the return of many Greek Australians which had gone to Greece before the crisis and also the arrival of newcomers from Greece, who have been received by the large Greek Australian community, mainly in Melbourne.

Demographics
At the 2021 census, 424,750 people stated that they had Greek ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), comprising 1.7% of the Australian population. At the 2021 census, 92,314 Australian residents were born in Greece.
The largest concentration of Greek Australians is in the state of Victoria, which is often regarded as the heartland of the Greek Australian community. Victoria's capital Melbourne has the largest Greek Australian community in Australia.
The 2021 census showed that the following states had the largest numbers of people nominating Greek ancestry: Victoria (181,184), New South Wales (141,627), South Australia (40,704), Queensland (32,702), Western Australia (16,117).
One study investigating the 54 most common ethnic groups in Australia found that Greek Australians had the lowest rate of intermarriage (marrying outside their ethnicity) than every other ethnicity in the first, second and third generations.

Culture
Religion
According to the 2016 Australian census, 91.4% of Australians with Greek ancestry are Christian, mainly Eastern Orthodox; however, minorities who belong to different Christian denominations like Catholics, Jehovah's Witnesses and Pentecostals also exist. Together, these other denominations make up 0.4% of the Greek Australian population. 5.6% identified as spiritual, secular or irreligious, and 2.6% did not answer the census question on religion. Greek Australians are predominantly Greek Orthodox. The largest religious body of Greek Orthodox Australians is the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia, with its headquarters at the Cathedral of The Annunciation of Our Lady in the inner Sydney suburb of Redfern.

Greek language
In 2016, the Greek language was spoken at home by 237,588 Australian residents, a 5.8% decrease from the 2011 census data. Greek is the seventh most commonly spoken language in Australia after English, Mandarin, Arabic, Cantonese, Vietnamese and Italian. The remainder of the ethnic Greek population in Australia mainly use English as their first language. Most Greek Australians speak the Greco-Australian dialect. Greco-Australian is an Australian-based dialect of Greek that is spoken by the local disapora, including by both Greek immigrants and Australians of Greek descent.

Media
The Greek language press began in Australia in 1913 when the first Greek weekly newspaper was published in Melbourne. In South Australia, the local Greek community published a short-lived newspaper called Okeanis (Oceania), around 1914 before it moved to Sydney. On 16 November 1926, George Marsellos and John Stilson published a broadsheet under the name Panellenios Keryx (Panhellenic Herald or The Greek Herald), becoming the second national Greek newspaper in Australia. In 1935 and 1936 a third newspaper, Pharos (Lighthouse), was published, and a number of short-lived titles were issued in the late 1960s, with the longest of these being Tachydromos (Mailman), founded in September 1968. In 1957, Hellenic/Greek language newspaper Neos Kosmos was founded by Dimitri Gogos, Bill Stefanou and Alekos Doukas, the latter also being an exceptionally well known author. Since 1994, a publication called Paroikiako Vema (Steps in the adopted Country) and printed in Renmark, has served the Greek community in rural South Australia.
Multicultural broadcaster SBS (Special Broadcasting Service) airs a Greek-language radio program every afternoon from 4 PM to 6 PM. The program features news, current affairs, music, interviews, and a talkback segment, where listeners can dial into the program from 5:30 PM onwards and express their opinion on a topic being focused on. Additionally, SBS also airs Greek public broadcaster ERT's Eidiseis news program every morning as part of their WorldWatch programming block.

Notable individuals
Academic
Nikos Athanasou – Professor of Musculoskeletal Pathology at Oxford University and a novelist.
Nick (Νικήτας) Birbilis – Professor of Engineering / Executive Dean, Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built Environment Deakin University
Adrian David Cheok – Professor of Pervasive Computing at City University London & Director of the Mixed Reality Lab
Nicholas Doumanis – Assoc. Professor of History, at the University of New South Wales
Nikolas Kompridis – Professorial Fellow at the University of Western Sydney in the School of Humanities & Communication Arts
Michael Kyrios - Emeritus Professor at Flinders University;  previous Vice President and Executive Dean, College of Education, Psychology and Social Work
Christos Pantelis – Professor of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne
Maria Skyllas-Kazacos – Emeritus Professor at the University of New South Wales, chemical engineer best known for her pioneering work of the vanadium redox battery
John Tasioulas – Director of Institute for Ethics in AI and Professor of Ethics and Legal Philosophy at University of Oxford and first Greek-Australian Rhodes Scholar

Art and design
Con Chrisoulis – comic book creator
Nonda Katsalidis – architect
Marc Newson – industrial designer
Polixeni Papapetrou – artist
Paul Pholeros – architect
Tony Rafty – caricaturist
Stelarc (Stelios Arkadiou) – artist
Christos Tsiolkas – writer
Michael Zavros – artist/painter

Business
Mark Bouris – managing director of Wizard
George Calombaris – chef, former judge MasterChef Australia
Con Constantine – former chairman, Newcastle United Jets
Andrew Demetriou – chief executive, Australian Football League
Tim Efkarpidis — businessman, property developer, Molongo Group
Harry Katsiabanis – founder of TaxiLink and StorageX
Antony J. J. Lucas – businessman noted for his philanthropic activities
Marinos Lucas – businessman, theatre company operator
Andrew N. Liveris – CEO of Dow Chemical Company
Kostas Makris – the richest Greek in Australia (in the top 30 of the richest residents in Australia)
Nick Pappas – chairman, South Sydney Rabbitohs
Nicholas Paspaley Senior and Paspaley family (Paspalis) – Paspaley dominate the pearling industry; large property holdings in Darwin CBD and properties in Sydney
George Peponis – chairman, Canterbury Bulldogs
Geoff Polites – chief executive officer of Australian Jaguar Land RoverFPV President / Tickford managing director
Nick Politis – car retailer and chairman of the Sydney Roosters rugby league club
James Samios – Hon. MBE Museum of Contemporary Art, Circular Quay, Sydney
Peter V'landys – chairman of the Australian Rugby League Commission

Fashion
Christopher Chronis – fashion designer
Napoleon Perdis – make-up artist
Alex Perry – fashion designer

Film, theatre, and television
Peter Andrikidis – director and producer, Underbelly, G.P.
Alex Andreas – actor, Fat Tony & Co.
Alex Blias – actor, Home and Away
Elena Carapetis – actress, Heartbreak High
Gia Carides – actress, Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery, Brilliant Lies, My Big Fat Greek Wedding, Strictly Ballroom
Zoe Carides – actress, Death in Brunswick, G.P.
Wayne Coles-Janess – director and producer
Chantal Contouri – actress, Number 96
Mary Coustas – comedian and actress
Alex Dimitriades – actor, The Heartbreak Kid, Heartbreak High, Head On, The Slap
Rebekah Elmaloglou – actress, Home and Away and Neighbours
Sebastian Elmaloglou – actor, Home and Away, brother of Rebekah
Damien Fotiou – actor, Kangaroo Jack, Head On
Nick Giannopoulos – actor, The Wog Boy, Acropolis Now and director
Diana Glenn – actress
George Houvardas – actor, Packed to the Rafters
Hugh Jackman – actor, Paperback Hero, Australia, Logan, The Greatest Showman
George Kapiniaris – actor, Acropolis Now and comedian
Peter Kelamis – comedian
Costas Kilias – actor
Ana Kokkinos – director, The Secret Life of Us, Head On
Katerina Kotsonis - actress, Neighbours
Nico Lathouris – actor
Costas Mandylor – actor, Saw, Picket Fences
Louis Mandylor – actor, My Big Fat Greek Wedding
Lex Marinos – actor, Kingswood Country, director, writer and broadcaster
Harry Michaels – actor, Number 96, producer, Aerobics Oz Style, and director, Sports TV
Bill Miller – director and producer
George Miller – Academy Award-winning director and producer, Babe, Happy Feet, Mad Max: Fury Road

Ada Nicodemou – actress, Home and Away, Heartbreak High, Police Rescue
Tony Nikolakopoulos – actor and director
Socratis Otto – actor, known for television series Young Lions, and Wentworth
Alex Papps – actor, Home and Away, The Henderson Kids and presenter, Play School
Thaao Penghlis – actor, Days of Our Lives, General Hospital, Santa Barbara (TV series)
Alex Proyas – director, I, Robot, Dark City, The Crow, Knowing

Jordan Raskopoulos – comedian and singer
Steen Raskopoulos – actor and comedian
Gina Riley – actress, Kath & Kim, comedian, entertainer and singer
Nathan Saidden – comedian
George Spartels – actor
Nadia Tass – director, Malcolm, The Big Steal
John Tatoulis – director and producer
Maria Theodorakis – actress
Alkinos Tsilimidos – director
Olympia Valance – actress, Neighbours, Playing for Keeps and model
Zoe Ventoura – actress, Packed to the Rafters
Helen Zerefos – actress and cabaret singer

Journalism
Nick Adams - also known as Nick Adamopoulos, US-based political commentator
Dimitri Gogos – late editor, Neos Kosmos
George Donikian – news presenter, Ten Network
Peter Frilingos – sports journalist with the Daily Telegraph in Sydney, and broadcaster and commentator with the Continuous Call Team
Helen Kapalos – journalist, reporter Sunday Night, Seven Network
Patricia Karvelas – journalist, ABC
Mary Kostakidis – journalist, SBS
John Mangos – news presenter and journalist, Sky News Australia
George Megalogenis – author and formerThe Australian newspaper journalist
Harry Nicolaides – novelist
Peter Peters – sports broadcaster and commentator

Justice
Chris Kourakis – Chief Justice of South Australia
Emilios Kyrou – Justice of the Supreme Court of Victoria
John Morris – Chief Justice of Tasmania (surname originally Moros)

Music
Peter Andre – singer, entertainer
Alex Carapetis – drummer
Kaz James – singer and DJ
James Kannis – singer (Australian Idol)
Chris Karan – jazz drummer (Dudley Moore Trio) and studio percussionist (Bob Marley & the Wailers)
Vasilliki Karagiorgos (Vassy) – singer and songwriter
John Lemmone – flute player and composer
Orianthi Panagaris – guitarist/musician
Sally Polihronas – singer (Bardot)
Nick Skitz – deejay-producer
Costas Tsicaderis – singer-songwriter

Politics
Nick Bolkus – federal politician
Michael Costa – former Finance Minister, New South Wales
Steve Dimopoulos – politician, Victoria
Nicholas Dondas - former politician Northern Territory
Jim Fouras – politician, Queensland
Steve Georganas – federal politician
Petro Georgiou – federal politician
John Hatzistergos – Attorney General, New South Wales
Peter Katsambanis – former politician, Victoria
Steve Kons – Deputy Premier, Tasmania
Nicholas Kotsiras – Minister, Victoria
Tom Koutsantonis – Minister for Trade, South Australia
Fiona Martin - former federal politician
Michael McCormack - former Deputy Prime Minister of Australia
Ken Michael – politician
Jenny Mikakos – former Health Minister, Victoria
John Pandazopoulos – politician, Victoria
Drew Pavlou – student activist at the University of Queensland
Eleni Petinos – politician, New South Wales
Nick Staikos – politician, Victoria
Andrew Theophanous – federal politician, Victoria (born Cyprus)
Theo Theophanous – politician, Victoria (born Cyprus)
Kat Theophanous – politician, Victoria
Arthur Sinodinos – former senator and Chief of Staff, PM John Howard
Maria Vamvakinou – federal politician, Victoria
Kon Vatskalis – politician, Northern Territory
Nick Xenophon – politician, South Australia
George Georgas – former politician Queensland

Religion
Archbishop Stylianos Harkianakis – former Primate of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia
Archbishop Makarios Griniezakis – current Primate of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia

Science and technology
Manuel Aroney – organic chemist
Gerasimos Danilatos – physicist, inventor of environmental scanning electron microscope
George North (Tramountanas) – pastoralist, sheep farmer and first Greek to settle in South Australia in 1842
Christos Pantelis – psychiatrist
George Paxinos – Professor of Psychology at the University of New South Wales
Michael Kyrios – clinical psychologist

Sport
Australian rules football
Luke Beveridge – Melbourne, Footscray & St Kilda player
Ang Christou – Carlton player
Andrew Demetriou – North Melbourne & Hawthorn player (later League CEO)
Ange Postecoglou – Soccer Manager
Josh Francou – Port Adelaide player
Gary Frangalas – Sydney & Richmond player
John Georgiades – Footscray player
John Georgiou – St.Kilda player
Con Gorozidis – St.Kilda & Footscray player
Athas Hrysoulakis – Collingwood player
Peter Kanis – Hawthorn player
Arthur Karanicolas – North Melbourne player
Patrick Karnezis – Brisbane & Collingwood player
Paul Koulouriotis – Port Adelaide & Geelong player
Spiro Kourkoumelis – Carlton & St Kilda player
Anthony Koutoufides – Carlton player
Angelo Lekkas – Hawthorn player
Spiro Malakellis – Geelong player
Tony Malakellis – Geelong & Sydney player
Steve Malaxos – Hawthorn & West Coast player
Daniel Metropolis – West Coast & Fremantle player
Russell Morris – Hawthorn & St Kilda player
Chris Pavlou – Carlton player
Phillip Poursanidis – Carlton player
Lou Richards – Collingwood player
Ron Richards – Collingwood player
John Rombotis – Fitzroy, Port Adelaide & Richmond player
Tony Spassopoulos – Fitzroy player
Jimmy Toumpas – Melbourne & Port Adelaide player
Jason Traianidis – St Kilda player
Zeno Tzatzaris – Footscray player
David Zaharakis – Essendon player

Boxing and kickboxing
Evangelos Goussis – Kickboxer and Boxer, convicted murderer
George Kambosos Jr. – Professional boxer
Michael Katsidis – Professional Boxer, former WBA and WBO lightweight champion
Stan Longinidis – Kickboxer, former World Kickboxing Champion
Tosca Petridis – Kickboxer, former World Kickboxing Champion

Cricket
Jason Gillespie – cricket coach and retired Australia international cricketer
Peter Hatzoglou – Melbourne Renegades cricketer
Sam Konstas - Sydney thunder cricketer
Blake Nikitaras - Sydney thunder cricketer
Steve Nikitaras - Former WA cricketer
Marcus Stoinis – Australia international cricketer

Flying disc
Maxwell Gratton – CEO, Flying Disc Australia

Soccer
John Anastasiadis – former player of Heidelberg United, PAOK, South Melbourne and Yarraville Glory. Represented the Socceroos at U21 level. Coached Yarraville Glory, South Melbourne, Oakleigh Cannons and is current coach of Bentleigh Greens.
Panos Armenakas – player, Udinese Calcio
Con Blatsis – former player of South Melbourne, Derby County, Sheffield Wednesday (on loan), Colchester United, Kocaelispor and St Patrick's Athletic. Represented the Socceroos at U20, U23 and senior level.
Con Boutsianis – former player of South Melbourne, Heidelberg United, Collingwood Warriors, Bentleigh Greens, Perth Glory, Bolton Wanderers, Bulleen Zebras, Oakleigh Cannons, Essendon United and Malvern City. He represented the Socceroos at senior level.
Dean Bouzanis – player Reading, Melbourne City and former Liverpool FC
Jason Davidson – player Eupen, Melbourne Victory and former Socceroos
Chris Kalantzis – player
Evan Kostopoulos – player, Adelaide United
Stan Lazaridis – player, Perth Glory and Socceroos
Apostolos Stamatelopoulos – player, Adelaide United and Western United
Michalis 'Mike' Mandalis - player, one of Australia's all-time greats South Melbourne and Melbourne Hakoah
Lucas Pantelis – former player
Jim Patikas – former player, first Australian participant in UEFA Champions League, former Socceroos
Ange Postecoglou – coach Socceroos, Celtic and Spurs, former player
Peter Raskopoulos - player, Sydney Olympic FC
Nick Theodorakopoulos – coach
Michael Theoklitos – former player of Brisbane Roar, Melbourne Victory, South Melbourne
Michael Valkanis – coach, Melbourne City and Greece national football team assistant
Helen Caceres – player
Andy Vlahos – player
Charlie Yankos – former Socceroos captain
Terry Antonis – player, Western Sydney Wanderers
Apostolos Giannou – player, Kerala Blasters
Avraam Papadopoulos – player, Australian born Greece national football team member
Jesse Makarounas – player, Melbourne Victory
Dimitri Petratos – player, Mohun Bagan Super Giant
Kosta Petratos – player, St George City
Maki Petratos – player, St George City
Chris Ikonomidis – player, Melbourne Victory
Anthony Lesiotis – player, Melbourne City

Mixed martial arts
George Sotiropoulos – former UFC mixed martial artist
Alexander Volkanovski – UFC mixed martial artist

Rugby league
Braith Anasta – player, Sydney Roosters
Jason Demetriou - player/coach
George Gatis – player, New Zealand Warriors
Steve Georgallis – player/coach
Michael Korkidas – player, Salford City Reds
Nick Kouparitsas – player, Canterbury Bulldogs
Glenn Lazarus – player Canberra Raiders, Brisbane Broncos and Melbourne Storm
Billy Magoulias — player, Cronulla Sharks
George Peponis – former Australian captain
Peter Peters - player, Manly-Warringah
Willie Peters – player, South Sydney Rabbitohs
Jim Serdaris – player, South Sydney, Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs
John Skandalis – player, Huddersfield Giants
Jason Stevens – player, St-George Illawarra Dragons, Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks
Justin Tsoulos – player, Parramatta Eels
Arthur Kitinas – player/coach, South Sydney Sydney Roosters

Sailing
Edward Psaltis – sailor

Shooting
Michael Diamond – shooter – Olympic gold medallist, Sydney 2000

Skateboarding
Tas Pappas – former World No.1
Ben Pappas

Skiing
Lydia Lassila – skier

Tennis
Mark Philippoussis – player
Nick Kyrgios – player
Thanasi Kokkinakis – player

Weightlifting
Robert Kabbas - athlete
Bill Stellios - athlete

Wrestling
Tony Kontellis – professional wrestler
Spiros Manousakis (Spiros Arion) – wrestler

See also
Australia–Greece relations
Australians in Greece
Cypriot Australians
European Australians
Europeans in Oceania
Greek Cypriots
Greek New Zealanders
Greek Orthodox churches in New South Wales
Greeks
Immigration to Australia
Neos Kosmos

References
Bibliography
Tamis, Anastasios (2005). The Greeks in Australia. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-54743-1
Gilchrist, Hugh (1992), Australians and Greeks Volume I: The Early Years, Brown, Prior, Anderson Pty. Ltd., ISBN 978-1-875684-01-4
Alexakis, Effy and Janiszewski, Leonard (1998). In Their Own Image: Greek-Australians. Hale & Iremonger Pty Limited. ISBN 0-86806-655-9
Alexakis, Effy and Janiszewski, Leonard (1995). Images of Home: Mavri Xenitia. Hale & Iremonger Pty Limited. ISBN 0-86806-560-9
Alexakis, Effy and Janiszewski, Leonard (2013). Selling an American Dream: Australia's Greek Cafe. Macquarie University. ISBN 9781741383959
Alexakis, Effy and Janiszewski, Leonard (2016). Greek Cafes & Milk Bars of Australia. Halstead Press. ISBN 9781925043181

External links
Diamadis, Panayiotis – University of Technology, Sydney (2011). "Greeks". Dictionary of Sydney. Retrieved 4 October 2015.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) (Greeks in Sydney) [CC-By-SA]
A video of Peter Yiannoudes, who established Greek Cinema in Victoria in the 1950s on Culture Victoria
Meet me at the Paragon digital stories, State Library of Queensland. Digital stories relating to Greek Australian owned café and milk bars in Queensland