Rivers are ordered alphabetically, by state. The same river may be found in more than one state as many rivers cross state borders.

Longest rivers nationally
Longest river by state or territory
Although the Murray River forms much of the border separating New South Wales and Victoria, it is not Victoria's longest river because the New South Wales border is delineated by the river's southern bank rather than by the middle of the river. The only section of the river formally within Victoria is a stretch of approximately 11 kilometres (7 mi) where it separates Victoria and South Australia. At this point, the middle of the river forms the border.

Rivers by state or territory
The following is a list of rivers located within Australian states and territories. Where a river crosses a state or territory boundary, it is listed in both states and territories. Where a river has a name that includes the word creek, it has been officially designated as a river.

Australian Capital Territory
New South Wales
The Geographical Names Board of New South Wales lists 439 rivers in the Geographical Names Register. In the following list, where there are duplicated names, the source local government area (LGA) is identified. In the event of there being two rivers of the same name within the same local government area, additional referencing is provided. Rivers of New South Wales lists all rivers below, grouped according to whether the river flows towards the coast or flow inland, and grouped according to their respective catchment and sub-catchment. Where shown in italics, the watercourse is a creek, rivulet, brook, or similar.

Northern Territory
Queensland
South Australia
Tasmania
Victoria
Western Australia
List of major rivers by basin
Australia's largest primary rivers

  
*Daly–Katherine (682 km), Roper–Waterhouse (599 km), Cooper Creek–Barcoo (1,420 km), Warburton–Georgina (1,400 km); De Grey–Oakover (569 km);

See also
List of rivers
List of drainage basins of Australia
List of valleys of Australia

References
External links
 Media related to Rivers of Australia at Wikimedia Commons