A total of fourteen women have served, or are serving, as the head of an Australian government. Of these, one has served as the prime minister of Australia, eight as the premier of a state and five as the chief minister of a territory. Twenty women have also served, or are serving, as the deputy head of government in Australian states and territories; one has served as the deputy prime minister of the country, thirteen as the deputy premier of a state, and six as the deputy chief minister of a territory.
The first female head of government in Australia, was Rosemary Follett in 1989, who was the 1st Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory. Carmen Lawrence became the first female premier of a state in 1990, by serving as the 25th Premier of Western Australia. In 2010, Julia Gillard became the first, and to date, only female Prime Minister of Australia.
Today, every Australian state and territory has had at least one female head of government, except for South Australia; the Australian Capital Territory has had the most, with three serving throughout its 35-year history; Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and the Northern Territory have each had a second female head of government serving in their respective jurisdiction. The most female heads to serve concurrently was four, during the 315 days between 16 May 2011 and 26 March 2012. Annastacia Palaszczuk, who served as the 39th Premier of Queensland from 2015 to 2023, had the longest tenure of any female head of government in Australia. The shortest tenure belongs to Kristina Keneally, who served as the 42nd Premier of New South Wales for a little over a year from 2009 to 2011.
There are currently two serving female heads of government in Australia: Jacinta Allan (49th Premier of Victoria) who was appointed on 27 September 2023, and Eva Lawler (13th Chief Minister of the Northern Territory) who was appointed on 21 December 2023. In addition, four women currently serve as deputy heads of government in Australia; Yvette Berry (Deputy Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory) since 31 October 2016; Susan Close (Deputy Premier of South Australia) since 21 March 2022; Prue Car (Deputy Premier of New South Wales) since 28 March 2023; and Rita Saffioti (Deputy Premier of Western Australia) since 8 June 2023.

Female heads of government
Heads
Deputy heads
Female opposition leaders
Timeline
Heads
Red represents members of the Australian Labor Party, blue represents members of the Liberal Party of Australia.

Deputy heads
Red represents members of the Australian Labor Party, blue represents members of the Liberal Party of Australia and orange represents the Country Liberal Party.

See also
Women and government in Australia
List of elected and appointed female heads of state and government
List of female first ministers in Canada
List of female governors in the United States

Notes
References
External links
Australian Electoral Commission: Electoral Milestones for Women