Vietnamese Australians (Vietnamese: Người Úc gốc Việt) are Australians of Vietnamese descent. Vietnamese Australians are one of the largest groups within the global Vietnamese diaspora. 
At the 2021 census, 334,781 people stated that they had Vietnamese ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), representing 1.3% of the Australian population. In 2021, the Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated that there were 268,170 Australian residents who were born in Vietnam.

History
Up until 1975 there were fewer than 2,000 Vietnam-born people in Australia. Following the takeover of South Vietnam by the North Vietnamese communist government in April 1975, Australia, being a signatory to the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, agreed to resettle its share of Vietnam-born refugees under a refugee resettlement plan between 1975 and 1985.  After the initial intake of refugees in the late 1970s, there was a second immigration peak in 1983–84, most likely a result of the 1982 agreement between the Australian and Vietnamese governments (the Orderly Departure Program) which allowed relatives of Vietnamese Australians to leave Vietnam and migrate to Australia.  A third immigration peak in the late 1980s seems to have been mainly due to Australia's family reunion scheme.

Demographics
At the 2021 census, 334,781 people stated that they had Vietnamese ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), representing 1.3% of the Australian population. In 2021, the Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated that there were 268,170 Australian residents who were born in Vietnam. In 2021, Vietnamese Australians were the fourth largest Asian Australian ancestry after Chinese Australians, Indian Australians and Filipino Australians. In 2021, Vietnam was the sixth most common foreign country of birth.
In the 2001 census, first generation Australians of Vietnamese ancestry outnumbered second generation Australians with Vietnamese ancestry (74% to 26%) Relatively few people of Vietnamese ancestry stated another ancestry (6%). Among the leading ancestries, the proportion of people who spoke a language other than English at home was highest for those of Vietnamese (96%).
In Melbourne the suburbs of Richmond, Footscray, Springvale, Sunshine and St Albans have a significant proportion of Vietnamese Australians, while in Sydney they are concentrated in Cabramatta, Cabramatta West, Canley Vale, Canley Heights, Bankstown, St Johns Park and Fairfield. In Brisbane they are concentrated in Darra and Inala. There are also significant Vietnamese Australian communities in Adelaide, Canberra and Perth.

Socioeconomics
Vietnamese Australians used to vary in income and social class levels. Australian born Vietnamese Australians are highly represented in Australian universities and many professions (particularly as information technology workers, optometrists, engineers, doctors and pharmacists), whilst in the past, some members in the community were subjected to poverty and crime.

Religions
According to the 2016 census, 40.46% of Vietnamese Australians are Buddhist, 28.77% are Christian, and 26.46% follow secular or no religious beliefs.
As of the 2021 census, 44.7% of Vietnamese Australians are Buddhist, 29.2% are unaffiliated, 23.5% are Christian (with 19.8% Catholic), 0.7% are other religion and 2.5% are not stated.

Language
In the 2001 census, the Vietnamese language was spoken at home by 174,236 people in Australia, making it the sixth most widely spoken language after English, Italian, Greek, Cantonese,  and Arabic.
According to the 2021 census, the Vietnamese language was spoken at home by 320,760 people in Australia, making it the fourth most widely spoken language after English, Mandarin and Arabic.

Vietnamese-Australian to Vietnam relationship
Media
During October 2003, government owned SBS TV began airing a Vietnamese news program called Thoi Su ('News'). The stated purpose was to provide a news service to cater for Australia's Vietnamese population. This was received poorly by the significant portion of the older generations of the Vietnamese community had previously fled after the fall of South Vietnam and still harboured resentment to the ruling government and its institutions, including the state-controlled media, such as Thoi Su. The program was also claimed to lack reports that include political arrests or religious oppression in Vietnam.  A large protest was convened outside SBS's offices. SBS decided to drop Thoi Su (which was being provided at no cost to SBS through a satellite connection).  SBS subsequently began broadcasting disclaimers before each foreign news program stating it does not endorse their contents.

Culture
Besides local Vietnamese news from SBS Australia, variety shows such as Paris By Night, a mostly overseas Vietnamese production, has become well-renowned amongst Vietnamese-Australians and well as Vietnamese content from Vietnam. Figures from the show such as Nguyen Ngoc Ngan and Nguyen Cao Ky Duyen are beloved personalities by Vietnamese at large as well as many other figures such as the late Chi Tai and Hoai Linh.

Notable Australians of Vietnamese ancestry
Anh Do – Comedian, actor, author of The Happiest Refugee and brother of Khoa Do
Khoa Do – Young Australian of the Year in 2005, writer, director and brother of Anh Do
Kim-Anh Do – Mathematician
Alexandra Huynh – Soccer player, member of the Australia national women's football team
Tien Kieu – ALP politician, member of the Legislative Council of Victoria, physicist
Charles Tran Van Lam – Former Foreign Minister of South Vietnam (1969–1972), first Vietnamese Ambassador to Australia (late 1950s), President of the Senate of South Vietnam (1973), one of signatories of the Paris Peace Accord (1973)
Hieu Van Le, AO – 35th governor of South Australia and Chairman of the South Australian Multicultural and Ethnic Affairs Commission (SAMEAC)
Dai Le – Liberal Party-turned independent politician, first refugee and Vietnamese Australian to be elected to federal parliament.
Nam Le – author of The Boat, winner of the 2008 Dylan Thomas Prize for The Boat
Tan Le – 1998 Young Australian of the Year
Giang Le-Huy – Actor
Tony Le-Nguyen – Actor, writer, Director and producer
Martin Lo – Soccer player
Trung Ly – Martial artist/action director
Phuong Ngo – ALP politician (member of Fairfield Council, NSW), Catholic community leader convicted for the homicide of John Paul Newman, and suspected drug lord
Thang Ngo – Fairfield councillor (1999–2008), cast member of Once Upon a Time in Cabramatta documentary, food writer and publisher of Noodlies food blog
Tung Ngo – ALP politician, member of the Legislative Council of South Australia
Giang Nguyen – Mathematician and chess player
Jillian Nguyen – actress
Jordan Nguyen – engineer
Luke Nguyen – chef and owner of Red Lantern in Surry Hills, Sydney and host of Luke Nguyen's Vietnam on SBS
Nam-Trung Nguyen – Scientist
Peter Nguyen Van Hung – Catholic priest and human rights activist on Taiwan
Martin Nguyen – MMA Featherweight World Champion
Rob Nguyen – Formula 3000 driver
Sang Nguyen – Victorian ALP Upper House politician
Tach Duc Thanh Nguyen – Convicted drug smuggler and member of the Bali Nine
Tai Nguyen – Actor
Van Tuong Nguyen – Executed drug trafficker
Vincent Long Van Nguyen – Roman Catholic bishop of Parramatta
Ngan Phan-Koshnitsky – chess player
Anathan 'Ana' Pham – professional video game player
Batong Pham – ALP Upper House politician in Western Australia
Hanni Pham – member of South Korean group NewJeans
Hoa Pham – Writer
Helen Quach – Music conductor
Hoan Ton-That – Computer programmer and start-up entrepreneur
Caroline Tran – Triple J announcer
Maria Tran – actress and filmmaker
Natalie Tran – video blogger on YouTube. The most subscribed to YouTuber from Australia. Our Natalie raking in $100,000 a year from YouTube
Andy Trieu – Actor and martial artist
Vivienne Nguyen – Chairperson, Victorian Multicultural Commission
Huong Truong – Australian Greens former politician, MLC in Victoria
Van Thanh Rudd – Political artist, nephew of Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd
Vico Thai – Television and Film Actor
San Hoa Thang, AC – Polymer chemist
Tran My Van – Academic
Catherine Van-Davies – Actress
Tracy Vo – Journalist and newsreader
Tri Vo – Lawyer and Politician
Quan Yeomans – Lead singer and guitarist of Regurgitator

See also
Asian Australians
Australia–Vietnam relations

References
External links

Vietnamese Community in Australia
The Vietnamese in Australia 
Gold & Silver: Vietnamese migration and relationships with environments in Vietnam and Sydney
Vietnamese Queenslanders. Short (3-4mins) digital stories from 5 Vietnamese Queenslanders, a project from the Queensland Vietnamese community and the State Library of Queensland.
Ashley Carruthers – Australian National University (2008). "Vietnamese". Dictionary of Sydney. Dictionary of Sydney Trust. Retrieved 4 October 2015. [CC-By-SA] (History of Vietnamese in Sydney)