ABSTRACT We present a radio survey carried out with the Australia Telescope Compact Array. A motivation for the survey was to make a complete inventory of the diﬀuse emission components as a step towards a study of the cosmic evolution in radio source structure and the contribution from radio-mode feedback on galaxy evolution. The Australia Telescope low-brightness survey (ATLBS) at 1388 MHz covers 8.42 deg2 of the sky in an observing mode designed to yield images with exceptional surface brightness sensitivity and low confusion. The survey was carried out in two adjacent regions on the sky centred at RA: 00h 35m 00s, DEC: −67◦ 00′ 00′′ and RA: 00h 59m 17s, DEC: −67◦ 00′ 00′′ (J2000.0). The ATLBS radio images, made with 0.08 mJy beam−1 rms noise and 50′′ beam, detect a total of 1094 sources with peak ﬂux exceeding 0.4 mJy beam−1. The ATLBS source counts were corrected for blending, noise bias, resolution, and primary beam attenuation; the normalized diﬀerential source counts are consistent with no upturn down to 0.6 mJy. The percentage integrated polarization Π0 was computed after corrections for the polarization bias in integrated polarized intensity; Π0 shows an increasing trend with decreasing ﬂux density. Simultaneous visibility measurements made with longer baselines yielded images, with 5′′ beam, of compact components in sources detected in the survey. The observations provide a measurement of the complexity and diﬀuse emission associated with mJy and sub-mJy radio sources. 10% of the ATLBS sources have more than half of their ﬂux density in extended emission and the fractional ﬂux in diﬀuse components does not appear to vary with ﬂux density, although the percentage of sources that have complex structure increases with ﬂux density. The observations are consistent with a transition in the nature of extended radio sources from FR-ii radio source morphology, which dominates the mJy population, to FR-i structure at sub-mJy ﬂux density.
Our understanding of galaxy evolution across cosmic time depends on multi-wavelength data, which are products of ultra-deep surveys across the electromagnetic spectrum that have been made using the most sensitive observatories in op- eration. Instrument design constraints and resource limita- tions usually lead to survey strategies that range from all-sky surveys with low angular resolution and sensitivity to ultra- deep surveys of small sky regions that are made with high angular resolution; diﬀerent survey strategies address diﬀer- ent components of source populations and diﬀerent aspects of galaxy evolution.
The normalized diﬀerential radio source counts are ob- served to show an upturn below ﬂux density of about 1 mJy (Windhorst et al. 2005) indicating a rapid increase in the number of faint sources at these ﬂux density levels, which might constitute a new population. The bulk of these faint radio sources in the 0.1–1 mJy range in ﬂux density are iden- tiﬁed with early type galaxies (Mainieri et al. 2008), with radio structure believed to be of the FR-i (Fanaroﬀ & Riley 1974) type (Padovani et al. 2007), which often have associ- ated extended emission components. Therefore a complete census of the radio emission associated with faint galaxies, at these ﬂux density levels and at intermediate redshifts of z = 1–2, requires imaging with good surface brightness sen- sitivity. Additionally, the radio morphology of the relatively lower surface brightness extended emission is a clue to the nature of the radio source and is a means of distinguishing between active galactic nuclei (AGNs) of diﬀerent classes.
The Square Kilometre Array (SKA1) has the potential to detect AGNs, including the radio quiet population, out to redshift z ≈ 6. As compared to X-ray and optical surveys, ra- dio imaging with the next generation telescopes are likely to become the instrument of choice for identifying high redshift AGNs, in particular the obscured AGNs (Jarvis & Rawlings 2004). In this context, it is important to quantify the expec- tations for radio source confusion from both compact and extended radio source components at faint ﬂux density lev- els as this is a potential limitation to imaging with sub-µJy sensitivity. A characterization of the radio sky at faint ﬂux density—in total intensity and polarization—is a useful in- put to simulations of the radio sky and optimization of SKA array conﬁgurations as well as observing strategies.
The survey presented here has been made with the speciﬁc goal of providing a view of the low surface bright- ness radio emission associated with mJy and sub-mJy radio sources, to provide a database for their characterization, as- sessment of the cosmic evolution of extended radio compo- nents and their inﬂuence on galaxy evolution. The surface brightness sensitivity of this survey, which we refer to as the Australia Telescope Low-Brightness Survey (ATLBS), is about a factor of ﬁve better than any previous survey with comparable resolution (Subrahmanyan et al. 2007). In this ﬁrst paper we present the ATLBS survey together with the source counts and a population study of the radio structures. Forthcoming papers will present detailed radio structures, optical identiﬁcations, polarization analysis, and explore in depth the open problems like, for example, cosmic evolution of low power radio galaxies, evolution of the radio source structure with cosmic epoch and the role of kinetic-mode feedback from AGNs on galaxy environment and galaxy evo- lution, where progress depends on our understanding of the low surface brightness radio sky.
Deep surveys that target weak extended emission compo- nents and attempt to get close to the confusion limit re- quire good control of systematics. Interferometers are pre- ferred over single-dish scanning surveys because of the in- herent insensitivity to the mean sky background and, conse- quently, the vastly superior stability in the zero-point level that is achievable in images constructed using Fourier syn- thesis techniques.
Extended radio sources usually have steep spectral in- dices and, therefore, it has often been argued that surveys for the detection of low surface brightness sources ought to be made at relatively low radio frequencies. While this argu- ment is correct, there are practical issues that merit consid- eration. At frequencies below about 1 GHz, elements form- ing interferometer telesopes often have poorly deﬁned ﬁelds of view (primary beams), relatively larger sidelobe levels, and confusion arising from radio sources limits the attain- able dynamic range. Additionally, the ionosphere introduces time-varying phase errors that are diﬃcult to calibrate and correct. The available bandwidth is also limited at low fre- quencies. For these reasons, the optimum frequency for deep surveys with high surface brightness over moderate sky areas is perhaps around 1 GHz today, and might move to lower fre- quencies as technology and calibration algorithms relevant for wide-ﬁeld imaging at low radio frequencies improve.
High ﬁdelity surveys for extended sources with low sur- face brightness requires good spatial frequency coverage. Holes in the visibility plane—the uv-coverage—eﬀectively reduces the number of independent synthesized beam areas within the primary beam and, consequently, sidelobe confu- sion due to discrete sources limits the image dynamic range and quality. Most 2D Fourier synthesis imaging arrays like, for example, the Very Large Array (VLA) and the Giant Me- trewave Radio Telescope (GMRT) have array conﬁgurations optimized for imaging performance in snap-shot mode and in cases where most of the sky region imaged is empty. The deconvolution algorithms implemented in software packages used in processing the data from such arrays also implicitly assume that most of the sky is empty. However, deep sur- veys that attempt to get close to sidelobe-confusion limits require ﬁlled uv-coverage and this motivation has led us to use the EW Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) for the observations presented here.
The ATCA has ﬁve movable antennas on a 3-km EW railtrack. We have used the array to image ﬁelds using four 750-m array conﬁgurations—the 750A, 750B, 750C and 750D arrays. Together, they provide 4 × 10 = 40 baselines and because the ATCA antennas are 22 m in diameter, the 40 spacings provide a nearly complete coverage over the 0– 750 m range. At the 750-m baseline, Earth rotation would move the visibility measurement point through a spatial wavelength corresponding to the antenna diameter in about 7 min. Therefore, the observing strategy was to mosaic im- age 19 distinct antenna pointing positions during a single observing session of 12 hr, cycling through all the pointing positions and observing each for 20 sec so that all the 19 po- sitions would be re-visited once every 7 min. This ensured that the elliptic uv-tracks have complete azimuthal coverage for each pointing. Observations with the ATCA were made using the 20-cm band.
Table 1. Journal of the ATCA radio observations.
The 19 pointing positions observed during any observ- ing session were arranged to tile the sky in a hexagonal pat- tern so as to cover the sky with a smaller number of pointings compared to a square grid. In the 20-cm band, the ATCA antenna primary beam has a full width at half maximum ′ (FWHM) of about 35 , and mosaic imaging of large angu- lar scale extended structure requires a sky plane ‘Nyquist’ ′ 5. However, we have adopted to sur- sampling interval of 19. vey the sky as a collage of individual image tiles without attempting to image structure on the scale of the primary beam or greater; therefore, the hexagonal-packed adjacent ′ pointings are spaced 28. 6 and this spacing is suﬃcient to cover the sky with fairly uniform sensitivity. The sequence in which the pointings were observed was selected to minimize time lost while the telescope cycled through the pointings.
Since our observations use the ATCA with antennas on EW baselines, the survey region was constrained to be at high southern declinations and far from the equator, in order to image with close to circular synthesized beams. High south- ern declinations are also preferred so that the ﬁelds might be far from the Sun, and Solar interference would be minimized at epochs when the ﬁelds are scheduled for day-time observ- ing. To avoid shadowing at the shortest 30-m baseline, the ◦ ﬁeld centres had to be south of −50 declination. On the other hand, since follow-up optical observing with existing southern telescopes are important for the science goals, low declinations were preferred so that optical observing could be through low airmass. Since the ATCA is located at a latitude of −30◦, regions at very high southern declinations were avoided so that the survey might be made at reason- ably high telescope elevations, avoiding problems that might arise from ground spillover in the antenna radiation pattern. High Galactic latitudes were preferred since the background sky brightness and hence the system temperature would be lower.
The observations of each of these two sky regions were made in the four 750-m arrays and each of these four ses- sions were of 12-hr duration (time shared between the 19 pointing positions). The 20-cm band data were acquired in two 128-MHz wide bands centred at 1344 and 1432 MHz. Each band was covered by 16 independent frequency chan- nels. Multi-channel continuum visibility data were accumu- lated in full polarization mode: the ATCA antennas have feeds with linear polarization outputs labeled X and Y and the polarization products XX, YY, XY and YX are accumu- lated by the correlator. A journal of the radio observations is in Table 1.
The ATCA has six antennas: the location of the sixth antenna—ca06—is ﬁxed and provides baselines between 3 and 5 km with the other ﬁve antennas in the 750 m arrays. The resulting uv-coverage in our observations is completely ﬁlled out to 750 m and is sparsely covered in the 3–5 km range; there is a signiﬁcant ‘hole’ in the coverage between 750 m and 3 km.
The data were processed and imaged using the radio in- terferometer data reduction package MIRIAD. The calibra- tor visibilities were ﬁrst viewed using visualization tools in MIRIAD and obviously erroneous data were rejected. The multi-channel continuum visibility data were calibrated in amplitude, phase and for the bandpass using periodic ob- servations of the unresolved calibrator PKS B2353−686; the absolute ﬂux density scale was set using observations of the primary calibrator PKS B1934−638. Polarization calibra- tion for the telescope were derived from the full polariza- tion products measured on PKS B2353−686. A ﬁrst pass was made on rejecting data with interference using an auto- mated algorithm that examined the Stokes V visibilities and rejected the data corresponding to all polarization products at the same times and channels where the Stokes V visibility amplitudes exceeded a threshold of 4 times the rms thermal noise. The visibility data on the survey ﬁelds in individual baselines, in XY and YX polarization products, were vi- sualized as grey-scale displays of channel versus time, and obviously discordant data values were rejected. The data in XX and YY polarization products were also rejected during these times and for the same channels.
The mosaicing strategy adopted here is to individu- ally image and deconvolve the diﬀerent pointings and then combine them to produce a single wide-ﬁeld image. This approach—as compared to a ‘joint’ approach wherein all pointings are handled simultaneously during the imaging and deconvolution steps—is appropriate in the present case where dynamic ranges exceeding several hundred or so are desired and imaging structures on the scale of the antenna primary beam and larger is not a requirement.
Figure 1. Mosaic image of ATLBS survey region A made with a beam of FWHM 52.′′4 × 47.′′4 at P.A. 6◦. Contour levels are at −0.25, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 8.0, 16.0, 32.0, 64.0, 128.0 and 256.0 mJy beam−1.
Figure 2. Mosaic image of ATLBS survey region B made with a beam of FWHM 52.′′8 × 47.′′4 at P.A. 7.◦3. Contour levels are at −0.25, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 8.0, 16.0, 32.0, 64.0, 128.0 and 256.0 mJy beam−1.
The images corresponding to the 19 pointings constitut- ing each ﬁeld were lastly combined as a linear mosaic, fully correcting for the primary beam attenuation within the mo- saic region but retaining attenuations at the edges of the mosaic to prevent excessive noise ampliﬁcation there. These mosaic images of the ATLBS regions A & B are shown in Figs. 1 & 2 respectively. The images have an rms noise of −1 and the lowest contour level displayed is σ = 85 µJy beam −1 at 3σ. The peak in the image of region A is 104 mJy beam −1. The negative peaks and that in region B is 246 mJy beam −1 in the two images are at levels −450 and −575 µJy beam respectively, which are at the 5–7σ level. The ratio of image peak to rms noise exceeds 1000 and the images show no ob- vious artefacts due to calibration or imaging errors above a level of 3σ.
same baselines and weighting schemes used in making the Stokes I images. In making these images, we followed the ◦ procedure of ﬁrst constructing wide-ﬁeld 4 images, isolating the clean components representing emission from the side lobes of the primary beam, subtracted these com- ponents from the visibility data, then constructed images representing emission from the main lobes corresponding to each pointing position. The images corresponding to the dif- ferent pointings were then combined as a linear mosaic to reconstruct the Stokes Q and U emission from ATLBS region A and, separately, region B.
peaks in the Stokes I images are consistent with the image thermal noise.
As we have noted above, the 750 m array conﬁgurations have, additionally, sparse uv-coverage in the 3–5 km range as baselines to the sixth antenna ca06. While we have taken every eﬀort to ensure that the low resolution survey is of the highest quality, we may examine the additional infor- mation provided by the baselines to ca06 that could pro- vide some critical information on the compact components in the sources even though the uv-coverage is incomplete. We have used these longer baselines to construct indepen- dent images of the two survey regions with higher angular resolution. However, owing to the signiﬁcant ‘hole’ in the uv-coverage below 3 km in this visibility dataset, the syn- thesized beam has signiﬁcant sidelobes and confusion is a serious issue. Therefore, we have aided the deconvolution by using the low-resolution images constructed using the 750- m arrays to identify the sky regions that potentially contain source components.
The high resolution images have been constructed using 5 instantaneous baselines per conﬁguration compared with 10 baselines used to make the low resolution images. The rms −1, noise is, therefore, expected to be about 120 µJy beam and this expectation is very close to that measured in regions of the images that are apparantly source free. Deconvolu- tion iterations were stopped when the peaks in the residual image, within the regions being searched for components, −1. This implies that in the reduced below 0.4 mJy beam high resolution images the fractional ﬂux density exceeding 0.4 mJy are deconvolved and restored with Gaussian compo- nents; however, fractional intensities below 0.4 mJy continue to be represented by beams with signiﬁcant sidelobe struc- ture and their integral ﬂux density over the image will be zero.
FWHM 4.′′7 × 4.′′5 at P.A. −7.◦8 and 4.′′8 × 4.′′4 at P.A. 3.◦3 respectively. Since the uv-coverage is an annulus, we might expect that extended source components exceeding the size of these beams would be resolved and their ﬂux densities would be severely attenuated in these images. Nevertheless, source components with size less than these beams would be represented.
As an example, a portion of survey region A is shown in Fig. 3, where the high resolution image is in grey scales and the corresponding low resolution image is represented using contours. Most of the sources represented by closed contours also have compact components in the grey scale image; sources that appear extended in the low resolution image often appear to have multiple compact components.
The radio images were scanned, sources identiﬁed, and their radio properties listed by an automated algorithm. The rou- tine IMSAD in MIRIAD was modiﬁed for this purpose. Only the sky region where the primary beam response in the mo- saic exceeds 50% was searched for sources, and ﬂux density estimates were corrected for the primary beam attenuation. Islands in the low resolution images, with connected −1, were considered to be in- pixels exceeding 0.4 mJy beam dependent sources. Thus, the ATLBS source catalogue pre- sented herein includes all sources that have a peak ﬂux den- −1 in the low resolution im- sity exceeding 0.4 mJy beam ages. The centroid position of these connected pixels was listed as the source position and the source name was derived from this centroid position. Sources were automatically clas- siﬁed as unresolved, extended Gaussian or composite based on their structure in the low resolution image and the suc- cess in modeling the images using single-component Gaus- sians. Peak and total ﬂux densities were estimated for each source, both in the low resolution image and separately in the high resolution image. Extended sources without com- posite structure were ﬁtted using single Gaussian models and the ﬁt parameters as well as deconvolved source sizes were derived.
The fractional integrated polarized intensity Π0 was es- timated for the ATLBS sources from the low resolution im- ages in Stokes Q, U and I. Image pixels in which the Stokes I intensity exceeded 0.4 mJy beam−1 were considered, pixel intensities in Stokes Q, U and I were summed separately, a measure of the integrated polarized intensity was estimated Q2 + U 2, where Q and U represent by computing pm = the pixel-summed image values in Stokes Q and U respec- tively, the integrated polarized intensity was set to zero if the signal-to-noise ratio in this estimate was less than unity, the polarized intensity estimate was debiased (as described below) and the fractional integrated polarized intensity Π0 was computed as the ratio of integrated polarized intensity to integrated total intensity.
Figure 3. A portion of ATLBS survey region A with the low resolution image represented by a contour at 0.4 mJy beam−1 and the high resolution image shown using grey scales. The beam of the low resolution image has FWHM 52.′′4 × 47.′′4 at P.A. 6◦ and the beam corresponding to the high resolution image is 4.′′7 × 4.′′5 at P.A. −7.◦8; these beams are shown at the bottom right of the image as an unﬁlled ellipse and ﬁlled ellipse respectively.
The fractional increase fp versus the number of pixels in the summation is shown in Fig. 4. The ATLBS images have 1.75-arcsec pixels and, as expected, the variance in the pixel summation rises as the square of the number of pixels in the regime where the summation is over an area less than the beam area, where as the variance in the pixel summa- tion rises proportional to the number of pixels in the regime where the summation area exceeds the beam area. The break at about where the summation is over a beam area is be- cause the noise in image pixels is correlated within beam areas and uncorrelated on larger scales.
Figure 4. The fractional increase fp in noise variance in pixel- summed image intensities is plotted as a function of the number of pixels in the summation. The computation is for ATLBS images with beam FWHM of 50′′ and pixel size 1.′′75; there are about 102.81 pixels within a beam FWHM area and this is about where the curve has a break.
ful comparison of fractional integrated polarizations versus ﬂux density.
In the case of the imaging using the 750-m array data, the synthesized beam has small amplitude sidelobes because the uv-coverage is almost complete. However, in the case of the high resolution imaging the synthesized beam is very diﬀerent from a Gaussian approximation to the main lobe; therefore, estimating integral ﬂux densities of sources in the high resolution image suﬀers uncertainties and requires care- ful understanding of the inherent limitations arising from the annular visibility coverage and the cutoﬀ level adopted during deconvolution.
Within the search region, the farthest distance of a ′ source from pointing centres is 16. 4. Therefore, owing to the ﬁnite bandwidth of the frequency channels in the multi-frequency continuum data, visibility amplitudes at the longest baseline of 5020 m would be expected to have a worst case attenuation to 0.45 of the true value. Simula- tions using the visibility coverage used to construct the high resolution images and taking into consideration the chan- nel bandwidth corresponding to the observations suggest a worst case attenuation of source peaks to 0.8 of their true value in the high resolution images. We have modeled the bandwidth-related attenuation using a functional form ﬁt- ted to the simulation results and used this to scale the peaks derived from the high resolution images.
those tabulated peaks exceeding 0.4 mJy beam−1 as reliable at the 95% conﬁdence level.
The integrated ﬂux density of the sources in the high resolution image were estimated by summing the ﬂux densi- ties in the compact components. An iterative algorithm was adopted wherein the peak within the ‘footprint’ was located, a Gaussian ﬁt made to the component corresponding to the peak and the Gaussian component subtracted from the high resolution image. Successive peaks—including positive and negative peaks—were located, ﬁtted with Gaussian compo- nents and subtracted until the absolute value of the peak residual was below a threshold of 0.5 mJy beam−1. Thus, the listed values of integrated ﬂux densities in the high res- olution images is an estimate of the total ﬂux density in compact components exceeding 0.5 mJy; in case the peak within the source ’footprint’ is less than 0.5 mJy then the listed integrated ﬂux density is simply the peak ﬂux density. A total of 511 sources were identiﬁed in Field A and 585 sources in Field B. The two ﬁelds have a slight overlap in which there are two common sources; therefore, the number −1 peak of sources in our catalogue exceeding 0.4 mJy beam ﬂux density is 1094 over the 8.42 deg2 sky area.
Of the 484 sources with total ﬂux density in the range 0.4–1.0 mJy, 409 were classiﬁed as unresolved in the low ′′ resolution images made with beam FWHM of 50 . Of the 75 extended sources (15% of the sources in the 0.4–1.0 mJy range), 64 were deemed to be representable using a single Gaussian model; only 11 sources were classiﬁed as compos- ite. The fraction of sources classiﬁed to be extended increases to 28% in sources with ﬂux density in the range 1–10 mJy and about half of these sources are deemed composite in structure. As much as 70% of sources in the 10-100 mJy range in ﬂux density are extended, with three-fourths of these classiﬁed as composite. The fraction of sources that are deemed extended and with structure well ﬁt by single Gaussian models is about 15% over the entire ﬂux density range 0.4–100 mJy; however, the fraction that is deemed as possessing composite structure increases with ﬂux density rising from about 2% for the sub-mJy population to above 50% for sources with 100 mJy ﬂux density.
The angular size for the ATLBS sources were esti- mated by measuring the area enclosed by the contour at 0.4 mJy beam−1, assuming that the source has a Gaussian proﬁle, and computing the source width at half maximum. This estimate is expected to be conservative, and yields me- dian angular size of 10′′ for sources with ﬂux density be- ′′ low 10 mJy, rising to 20 for sources in the 10-100 mJy bin. As compared to the linear size distribution derived by Windhorst et al. (1990), the median angular size of the ATLBS sources appears substantially larger and the distri- bution in angular size appears to cutoﬀ more sharply. Most ATLBS sources appear only marginally resolved in the low- surface-brightness images made with beam FWHM of about ′′ 50 , and we postpone a discussion of the angular size distri- bution of the ATLBS sources to later papers where detailed structural information is presented.
as well as those derived from the high resolution images are listed. Percentage integrated polarization Π0 is in the last column of the Table.