ABSTRACT In an attempt to detect cosmic microwave background (CMB) anisotropy on arcmin scales, we have made an 8.7-GHz image of a sky region with a resolution of two arcmin and high surface brightness sensitivity using the Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) in an ultra-compact conﬁguration. The foreground discrete-source confusion was estimated from observations with higher resolution at the same frequency and in a scaled array at a lower frequency. Following the subtraction of the foreground confusion, the ﬁeld shows no features in excess of the instrument noise. This limits the CMB anisotropy ﬂat-band power to Qf lat < 23.6 µK with 95 per cent conﬁdence; the ATCA ﬁlter function∗ Fl in multipole l-space peaks at lef f = 4700 and has half maximum values at l = 3350 and 6050.
Key words: cosmic microwave background – cosmology: observations – techniques: interferometric.
compilation of data points and a discussion of their impli- cations).
Primary CMB anisotropies at small angular scales (l > ∼ 500) are expected to be relatively damped in most struc- ture formation models owing to the the thickness of the last scattering surface and the diﬀusion damping of sub-horizon scale baryon ﬂuctuations in the pre-recombination epoch. However, ﬂat-band powers comparable to the Qf lat detected by COBE DMR (Bennett et al. 1996) may be predicted at multipoles l > 500 in certain cosmological-constant (Λ) and ∼ open-universe manifestations of baryon isocurvature mod- els (Hu & Sugiyama 1994; Hu, Bunn & Sugiyama 1995). The anisotropy power at large l may be critically dependent on the reionization history: small-scale anisotropies may be suppressed by early reionization.
where Qf lat denotes the quadrupole normalization of a ﬂat CMB anisotropy spectrum. The observing scheme and data analysis procedures determine the window function Fl for any experiment. The implications of any observed CMB temperature variance (∆T )2 may be quoted in fairly model independent terms by the inferred Qf lat. This Qf lat may be viewed as being a measure of the CMB anisotropy power spectral density within the l-space window deﬁned by Fl.
Secondary anisotropies may be generated at the later last-scattering-surface in a reionized universe predominantly owing to second-order mode coupling between density per- turbations and bulk velocities (the ‘Vishniac eﬀect’); this could signiﬁcantly contribute to arcmin-scale (l > 103) ∼ anisotropies particularly if the ionization fraction is high at late times (Hu, Scott & Silk 1994). Persi et al. (1995) esti- mate that this second-order Doppler eﬀect may contribute a 103 in CDM and CDM+Λ band power Qf lat universes and that the anisotropy power may be an order of magnitude higher in certain baryon isocurvature models.
R. Subrahmanyan et al.
Anisotropies arising from the S-Z eﬀect, in a cosmo- logical population of groups and clusters of galaxies con- taining hot intra-cluster gas may be an important cause of anisotropy power at l > 103 (Persi et al. 1995; Bond & My- ∼ ers 1996). The S-Z anisotropies are generically non-Gaussian and are expected to have phase-correlations between dif- ferent l modes; their statistical description requires higher- order correlations apart from the Cl power spectra. Hot gas in groups and clusters in scale-invariant CDM universes nor- malized to give σ8 = 1 (the magnitude of dynamical cluster- ing at the present time is quantiﬁed by σ8 which is the rms mass ﬂuctuations in 8h−1-Mpc spheres) is expected to con- 103 (Bond & tribute band powers Qf lat Myers 1996). In COBE-normalized tilted CDM, MDM and models in which the shape factor Γ = Ω◦h is approximately 0.2, the predicted σ8 agrees better with galaxy clustering and in these models the band powers at large l are 1–2 orders of magnitude smaller. The dominant contribution at high l may come from quasar-ionized hot gas bubbles (Aghanim et al. 1996), whose existence is based on plausible theoretical inferences.
errors in the estimation of confusion owing to variability in the foreground sources and calibration errors are eliminated. Deconvolution errors are avoided because the confusion is es- timated as a model ﬁt to visibility data. These observations were made at the highest available frequency of 8.7 GHz to minimize discrete source confusion.
The ﬁeld was separately observed in a nearly scaled 244- m array at 4.7 GHz, with ﬁve ATCA antennae spaced 61-m apart along the E-W line, to examine the spectral indices of any features identiﬁed in the region as foreground sources and ensure that the sources subtracted indeed have spectra consistent with optically-thin thermal or synchrotron emis- sion. If the 4.7-GHz images are made with the same sensi- tivity to point-source ﬂux density as the 8.7-GHz images, the lower-frequency images that are made with the same angular resolution would be less sensitive to CMB temper- ature ﬂuctuations by a factor (4.7/8.7)α, where α = 2 is the spectral index of the CMB anisotropy at these frequen- cies. However, the 4.7-GHz images would have a relatively greater sensitivity to extended synchrotron emission by a factor (4.7/8.7)α, where α < 0.7 is now the steep spectral ∼ − index of extended synchrotron sources. To summarize, the 4.7-GHz image could potentially reveal extended foreground sources that may be resolved, and therefore absent, in the 61-m baseline data obtained at 8.7 GHz.
calibrator source PKS 1934 − 8768 MHz (Reynolds 1994).
In 1995 March, the ﬁeld was observed in a 244-m ar- ray at 4800 MHz. The observing and calibration procedure adopted was the same as for the 122-m array observations; the ﬂux-density scale was set by adopting a value of 6.22 Jy 638 at this frequency. for the primary calibrator PKS 1934 All images shown below were made using visibilities with ‘natural’ weighting so as to obtain a high signal-to- noise ratio, the gridding, Fourier transformations and de- convolution, if attempted, were done using the aips routine imagr. All displayed images are centred at the coordinates of the ﬁeld centre and, unless explicitely stated, have not been deconvolved. All images shown are in Stokes I and have not been corrected for the attenuation owing to the primary beam. The locus of the ﬁrst null in the primary beam pat- tern at 8704 MHz, located at a radius of 7 arcmin, is shown in all the images as a dot-dashed circle.
An image of the ﬁeld made at 4.8 GHz using the 61 and 122-m baselines of the 244-m array observations is shown in Fig. 1. The image has been deconvolved and has a resolu- tion of 1.4 arcmin. Within a radius of 3 arcmin, correspond- ing to the half-power radius of the ATCA primary beam at 8.7 GHz, three prominent sources are apparent and all these are detected with peak ﬂux density exceeding 10 times the image thermal noise.
In Fig. 2 we show an image of this ﬁeld at 8.7 GHz that has been constructed using just the four 30.6-m baselines. This image has not been deconvolved, but clearly shows three peaks at the positions of the three sources apparent in the 4.8-GHz image. It may be noted that the synthesized beam sidelobes are very large for this image because of the poor u, v coverage (only a single spacing – 30.6 m – has been used in the imaging).
The low-resolution 8.7-GHz image of the ﬁeld (Fig. 2) has a high surface brightness sensitivity, but is confusion limited owing to discrete sources in the ﬁeld. We estimate the foreground confusion owing to discrete sources in this ﬁeld using the data obtained in the longer (> 30.6 m) base- lines. However, we have restricted ourselves to using just the 61-m baseline (omitting the 92 and 122 m baselines) for deriving the confusion model so that the synthesized beam is only a factor of two smaller as compared to that for the high-surface-brightness image (Fig. 2) from which the co- fusion is to be subtracted. This may ensure that confusion structures on scales up to about an arcmin, if present, may be included in the confusion model.
Figure 1. Deconvolved image of the ﬁeld at 4800 MHz made with a beam of 96 × 72 arcsec2 at a position angle (p.a.) of 52◦. Contours at 27 µJy beam−1 × (−3, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 24, 32). The half-maximum size of the synthesized beam is shown in the bottom right corner as a ﬁlled ellipse. In this ﬁgure, as also the following three ﬁgures, the locus of the ﬁrst null in the primary beam pattern at 8704 MHz is shown as a dot-dashed circle.
Figure 2. An image of the ﬁeld at 8704 MHz made using just the 30.6-m baselines. The resolution is about 2.2 arcmin. Contours at 22 µJy beam−1 × (−10, −8, −6, −4, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16).
baselines (equivalent in angular resolution to the 61 m base- lines at 8.7 GHz) to a 3-component model that has compo- nent positions ﬁxed at the locations of the sources in the 8.7-GHz, 61-m visibilities: the ﬂux densities of these compo- nents are estimated to be 790, 335 and 262 µJy respectively.
R. Subrahmanyan et al.
Figure 3. A deconvolved image of the ﬁeld at 8704 MHz made using just the 61-m baselines. The image has a beam FWHM of 71 × 57 arcsec2 at a position angle (p.a.) of 0◦. Contours at 25 µJy beam−1 × (−4, −3, −2, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10). The half-maximum size of the synthesized beam is shown in the bottom right corner as a ﬁlled ellipse.
Figure 4. The residual image of the ﬁeld at 8704 MHz follow- ing the subtraction of the confusion model; this image has been made using just the 30.6-m baselines. The resolution is about 2.2 arcmin. Contours at 22 µJy beam−1 × (−3, −2, −1, 1, 2, 3).
do not have spectral indices α = 2 that would be expected of CMB anisotropies at these frequencies.
The three-component model for the foreground confu- sion, derived from the ﬁt to the 60-m visibilities obtained at 8.7 GHz, was subtracted from all of the 8.7-GHz visibility data. Following subtraction of the confusion, we constructed an image of the ﬁeld at 8.7 GHz using just the 30.6-m base- lines (Fig. 4). No residual features are apparent in this im- age. We weighted the image pixel intensities by the primary beam pattern and determined the weighted rms in the pri- −1. The mary beam region of the ﬁeld to be 21.2 µJy beam image pixel variance appears consistent with that expected from the telescope thermal noise (see section 4.1), and in sections 5 and 6 below we use this residual image to derive limits on random-phase CMB anisotropy on the 2-arcmin scale corresponding to the resolution in this image.
The processes which lead to the synthesized image are shown schematically in Fig. 5. The telescope thermal noise, foreground discrete sources and possibly CMB anisotropy contribute to the variance in the synthesized image. CMB anisotropy and foreground radio sources on the sky are attenuated by the primary-beam pattern of the antennae and convolved by the synthesized beam; their contribution may equivalently be viewed as a visibility-domain spatial- frequency ﬁltering of the sky signals as viewed through the primary beam. The telescope thermal noise may be consid- ered to be additive Gaussian random ﬂuctuations, that are characterized by an appropriate angular coherence function, but whose distribution on the sky image has no dependence on the primary beam.
The primary beam plays an important role in the signal path from sky sources to visibility data (or equivalently the synthesized image) and the l-space ﬁlter function that deter- mines the coupling of CMB power to image variance depends on the antenna aperture illumination function. Therefore, instead of modelling the primary beam in the sky plane, we have approximated the aperture illumination by a func- tion whose parameters characterize the central blockage and edge taper (James 1987) and have used parameter values that give an antenna power pattern that ﬁts the measured pattern out to the second null.
The number of independent pixels in the sky image made with just the 30.6-m baseline data, or equivalently the number of degrees of freedom in the variance estimate, may be approximately the number of independent visibility mea- surements along the 170 m long visibility track. The ﬁrst null of the ATCA primary beam power pattern is at 7 arcmin ra- dius at 8.7 GHz, this implies that the aperture illumination has an autocorrelation function with an eﬀective diameter of about 17 m and hence the number of independent visibility measurements is about 10.
Figure 5. The signal ﬂow path. It may be noted that the point spread function (PSF) corresponding to the sky sources – the synthesized beam – may diﬀer from the PSF associated with the telescope thermal noise.
variance is expected to be the telescope thermal noise. Sec- ond, by separately imaging the visibilities obtained as the XX and YY correlations between the two orthogonal linear antenna signals X and Y and computing the rms over the YY)/2 image: the Stokes I component of sources in (XX the ﬁeld cancel in this combined image and if we assume that the Stokes Q, U and V ﬂux densities are negligible compared to the thermal noise, the system thermal noise will be the only signiﬁcant contributor to the variance in this combined image. The two methods have yielded consis- tent values and the rms thermal noise in the sky image is −1 in the image of the ﬁeld estimated to be 22.8 µJy beam made using the 30.6-m baseline data. Adopting an antenna eﬃciency of 0.64 at 8.7 GHz (James 1985) the rms noise in the image is consistent with the system temperatures be- ing eﬀectively 72 and 43.5 K respectively during the 1991 and 1994 epoch observations; the later value is in agreement with 1994 epoch measurements of the system temperature made with microwave absorbers placed over the feed horns (Gough 1994).
these sky images and perform a 2D Fourier transform to the u, v-domain. This provides us with a u, v-domain ﬁlter ap- propriate for the telescope thermal noise. Our simulations of the thermal noise component in the sky images have assumed the noise to be Gaussian random, with a power spectrum identical to this 2D u, v-plane ﬁlter function and normalized to give an image rms noise same as the above- mentioned measured values.
The variance in the sky images have been determined by weighting the pixel intensities with the primary beam attenuation. We have simulated images with solely the ex- pected thermal noise contribution, computed the weighted image variances and obtained their distribution function. It may be noted that because the variance estimate is the weighted sum of squares of random variables, the variance is not expected to follow a χ2 distribution.
R. Subrahmanyan et al.
where ymin and ymax are the lower and upper limits to the ﬂux densities of sources present in the sky region and b(θ, φ) represents a beam pattern that is the product of the pri- mary beam centred at the antenna pointing centre and the synthesized beam centred at (θ◦, φ◦).
We reckon, based on our 1.4-GHz survey of the region, that the ﬁeld has no sources exceeding about 0.5 mJy at 8.7 GHz. The variance in the image made using the 30.6-m baseline data (Fig. 2) is a factor of two higher than that ex- pected owing to these sources assuming the Partridge et al. source counts. However, there is a reasonable (11 per cent) statistical probability that the ‘excess’ variance in the ﬁeld is foreground confusion. The number of sources (3) detected with ﬂux density exceeding 100 µJy – that constitute the model for confusion in the ﬁeld – and their combined ﬂux density, are also a factor of two larger than expected. A pos- sible explanation for these is that our 3-component model for confusion includes weaker sources that blend and give responses above the detection limit.
To summarize, the image variance appears to be in ex- cess of the expectation prior to any subtraction of sources, but after the confusion model is subtracted the image vari- ance is below expectations that are derived assuming a minimal residual and unsubtracted confusion. We are led to believe that either the derived confusion model includes sources weaker than 25 µJy, or perhaps that the faint sources are clustered. We are expanding our observations to several sky regions and expect to have a better understanding of the contribution from confusion following an examination of the residual ﬂuctuations in a larger sky area. While deriving limits on CMB anisotropy in sections 5 and 6 based on our observations of the ﬁeld, we assume that the residual im- age has contributions from the telescope thermal noise and CMB anisotropy alone.
X and where the summations are over pixel intensities that are weighted by the primary-beam attenuations at the pixel locations. We ﬁnd that the image in Fig. 2 has a3 = 0.13 and the residual image in Fig. 4 has a3 = 0.03. Our simu- lations of foreground confusion show that the derived skew coeﬃcient may be expected to have a standard deviation of as much as 0.57 about the mean skew, and that the expecta- tion for the skew coeﬃcient is just 0.11 and 0.05 respectively if foreground sources below 100 and 25 µJy remain unsub- tracted. Because of the limited number of independent sky pixels in the image of the ﬁeld, the skew coeﬃcient is not a useful statistic for characterizing the residual confusion; it may prove useful in statistical analyses of future observa- tions that cover multiple ﬁelds.
We model the CMB anisotropy as a Gaussian random ﬂuc- tuation in the sky temperature that is completely described by its power spectrum coeﬃcients Cl. The expectation for the image variance will then depend on the telescope ﬁlter function (TFF) Fl and the nature of the anisotropy power spectrum over the range in l-space that corresponds to the pass-band of the ﬁlter.
and this leads to the expression in equation (1).
Fl.
Figure 6. ATCA telescope ﬁlter function. The continuous line shows the TFF corresponding to the image made with the 30.6-m baseline data, the dashed line shows the ﬁlter corresponding to the 61-m baseline data.
If we adopt a ‘ﬂat’ CMB anisotropy spectrum with nor- malization Qf lat = 18 µK corresponding to the detected power at multipoles l < 20 (4-yr COBE DMR results in ∼ Bennett et al. 1996), the expected variance contribution in the 30.6-m baseline image is expected to be 182 0.765 = (15.7 µJy beam−1)2.
tor 0.18 of the peak of the 30.6-m baseline TFF. Summing over the 61-m baseline TFF, 12Fl/(5l) = 0.085: CMB anisotropy with a ﬂat spectrum will be expected to con- tribute a variance in the 61-m baseline image that is a factor 0.11 of the variance in the 30.6-m baseline image. Adopting a normalization Qf lat = 18 µK, the 61-m baseline image is −1)2 expected to have a variance contribution (5.2 µJy beam from CMB anisotropy. Because (a) the two TFFs have only a small overlap and are largely sampling CMB power at dif- ferent multipole ranges and (b) the 61-m baseline TFF has a greatly reduced sensitivity to CMB anisotropy, the con- fusion model that is derived from the 61-m baseline data is unlikely to signiﬁcantly reduce the CMB anisotropy power expected in the residual 30.6-m baseline image.
The (u, v)-plane CMB anisotropy model is then ﬁltered by the TFF corresponding to the 30.6-m baseline data and inverted to form simulated sky images. We have thereby obtained distributions of the sample variance from simu- lated images that have variance contribution from CMB anisotropy alone. It may be noted here that the radial dis- tribution of power in the (u, v)-plane in the case of our ‘ﬂat’ model CMB anisotropy diﬀers from that for thermal noise and, therefore, the two contributions diﬀer in the number of degrees of freedom in their contributions to image variance.
R. Subrahmanyan et al.
Figure 7. Likelihood functions. The dashed line corresponds to the null hypothesis IH1, the continuous curve corresponds to the hypothesis IH2 that Qf lat = 22.4 µK. The dotted line corresponds to the distribution function assuming that ‘ﬂat’ spectrum CMB anisotropy with Qf lat = 22.4 µK is the only contributor to the image variance.
We use the likelihood-ratio test to derive limits on pos- sible CMB ﬂat-band power in the data. We assume that the residual image has contributions only from the telescope thermal noise and possibly CMB anisotropy. The observed variance in the residual image shown in Fig. 4 is −1)2.
thermal noise and CMB anisotropy, will be a convolution of the two individual probability distributions. This distribu- tion, shown as a continuous curve in Fig. 7, represents the likelihood function IP(σ2 Qf lat) which is the probability of obs| obtaining any observed variance conditional on IH2.
The size α of the test is the probability of rejecting IH2 when it is true (a type i error). For the choice Qf lat = 22.4 µK, α = 0.05 and, therefore, Qf lat = 22.4 µK is a 95 per cent conﬁdence upper limit.
tribution from CMB anisotropy is zero.
CM B = 0.
Simulations of sky images that have only thermal noise with an expected variance (22.8 µJy beam−1)2 then yields the probability distribution for the sample variance. We show this distribution as the dashed line in Fig. 7 and represents the likelihood function IP(σ2 0) which is the probability of obtaining any observed variance conditional on IH1.
CM B corresponding to Qf lat.
proba- bility of accepting IH2 when IH1 is true (a type ii error). For our choice of Qf lat = 22.4 µK, the power β = 0.47. In order to increase the power of the test to a value β = 0.5, we may −1)2 increase the decision variance to σ2 and change the hypothesis IH2 to correspond to a choice Qf lat = 23.6 µK. For this choice of parameters, the test will reject IH2 with size α = 0.05 (95 per cent conﬁdence) and the test will simultaneously have a power β = 0.5.
To summarize, the ATCA observations of the ﬁeld place an upper limit of Qf lat < 23.6 µK with 95 per cent conﬁ- dence in an l-space ﬁlter that peaks at l = 4700. The ﬁlter has half-maximum values at l = 3350 and 6050.
Table 1. ATCA limits on GACF anisotropy models.
c (cid:17).
to the ATCA residual sky image. In this expression, ξc is the coherence scale in radians and Fl is the ATCA TFF corresponding to the variance estimate in the residual image of the observed ﬁeld.
Assuming that the sky temperature variance C◦ is an invariant, the expected image variance (∆S)2 is a maximum for an anisotropy model with ξc = 1 arcmin. We have sim- ulated sky images with the CMB anisotropy modelled to have a GACF and derived the distribution function for the image variance contribution. Limits to the model parameter C◦ may be derived for speciﬁc choices of the coherence scale ξc using the likelihood ratio test described in the previous section.
The Australia Telescope is funded by the Commonwealth of Australia for operation as a National Facility managed by CSIRO. RS thanks Rajaram Nityananda for his interest and helpful suggestions.
R. Subrahmanyan et al.
Hattori M. et al., 1997, Nature, 388, 146 Hu W., Scott D., Silk J., 1994, Phys. Rev. D, 49, 2 Hu W., Sugiyama N., 1994, ApJ, 436, 456 Hu W., Bunn E. F., Sugiyama N., 1995, ApJ, 447, L59 James G. L., 1985, IREECON’85 International Digest, p.713 James G. L., 1987, Proc. IEEE, 134, 217 Jones M. E. et al., 1997, ApJ, 479, L1 Lineweaver C. H., Barbosa D., 1997, astro-ph 9706077 Partridge R. B., Richards E. A., Fomalont E. B., Kellermann K.
In the case of CMB anisotropy experiments that are done using single-dish telescopes with a speciﬁed beam switch- ing scheme, the telescope beam is usually described by a 2D function on the sky that is normalized to unit volume. The antenna temperature measured at any sky position is then the mean sky brightness temperature weighted by the beam pattern. The antenna temperatures obtained at a set of sky positions (that are deﬁned by the beam switching scheme) are combined linearly to form an estimate of the CMB anisotropy. The ‘eﬀective’ beam on the sky is the same linear combination of the 2D telescope beam patterns. The TFF corresponding to the estimate of the CMB anisotropy that is made with the ‘eﬀective’ beam is the spherical har- monic decomposition of the ‘eﬀective’ beam pattern.
In observations for CMB anisotropy made with Fourier synthesis telescopes, the sky temperature anisotropy is viewed by the array through the element primary beam pat- tern. The temperature anisotropy, attenuated by the pri- mary beam pattern of the individual array element, is con- volved by the synthesized beam pattern. The synthesized beam is normalized to peak unity and has zero volume. Un- like the case of the ‘eﬀective’ beam in beam-switched, single- dish observations, the synthesized beam is not usually de- composable into a linear combination of identical (position shifted) beams that have ﬁnite volume. Therefore, the mea- surements (image pixel intensities) in Fourier synthesis im- ages are integrals of the sky brightness temperature over the synthesized beam and cannot be converted to mean (or weighted mean) temperatures by normalising with any beam volume. The measurements will be in units of ﬂux density (Jy) per beam rather than temperature.
If the ‘eﬀective’ beam is not simply a radial function, one computes the 2D Fourier transform IF(l, ξ) of the 2D beam 2 to get the b(θ, φ) and circumferentially averages | ﬁlter function Fl.
b(θ, φ)ei(θlcosξ+φlsinξ)dθdφ.
If the image variance is computed as a linear combina- tion of the squares of the pixel intensities (a weighted sum of squares), the TFF for the variance estimator may corre- spondingly be computed as the same linear combination of the Fl’s evaluated at the individual pixel locations.