Abstract Australia is a leader in autonomous systems technology, particularly in the mining industry, borne from necessity in a geographically dispersed and complex natural environment. Increasingly advanced autonomous systems are becoming more prevalent in Australia, particularly as the safety, environmental and efficiency benefits become better understood, and the increasing sophistication of technology improves capability and availability. Increasing use of these systems, including in the maritime domain and air domain, is placing pressure on the national safety regulators, who must either continue to apply their traditional regulatory approach requiring exemptions to enable operation of emerging technology, or seize the opportunity to put in place an agile and adaptive approach better suited to the rapid developments of the 21st century.
In Australia the key national safety regulators have demonstrated an appetite for working with industry to facilitate innovation, but their limited resources mean progress is slow. There is a critical role to be played by third parties from industry, government, and academia who can work together to develop, test and publish new assurance and accreditation frameworks for trusted autonomous systems, and assist in the transition to an adaptive and agile regulatory philosophy. This is necessary to ensure the benefits of autonomous systems can be realised, without compromising safety.
This paper will identify the growing use cases for autonomous systems in Australia, in the maritime, air and land domains, assess the current regulatory framework, argue that Australia’s regulatory approach needs to become more agile and anticipatory, and investigate how third-party projects could positively impact the assurance and accreditation process for autonomous systems in the future.
Autonomous systems, broadly meaning systems capable of determining, initiating and executing action in pursuit of a goal, are being used around the globe to increase the safety and efficiency of tasks, and to lower economic and environmental cost.[1] “To continue to make progress and innovate, ensuring that these systems have been designed responsibly and robustly will be key to safeguarding trust.”[2] While the technology enabling operation of these systems in the Australian maritime, air and land domains is rapidly advancing, the assurance and accreditation framework, which forms a necessary part of commercial operationalisation, is not keeping pace.
In Australia there is a gap in applied responsibility—it is within no specific Government department or organisation’s remit to take a holistic approach to catering for emerging technology in an assurance and accreditation context. While the key national safety regulators have demonstrated an appetite for working with industry to facilitate innovation, limited resources limit progress. There is a critical role to be played by third parties from industry, government, and academia who can collaborate to develop, test and publish new assurance and accreditation frameworks for trusted autonomous systems, and provide recommendations for areas the regulators should focus on to ensure the benefits of autonomous systems can be realised, without compromising safety.
Recognising the lack of applied responsibility issue, and the benefits and commercial opportunities in facilitating the design, manufacture and use of autonomous systems, the Queensland State Government has funded a new groundbreaking activity. The Assurance of Autonomy Activity includes two projects – ‘Enabling Agile Assurance of Drones in Queensland’, and ‘National Accreditation Support Facility Pathfinder (NASF-P) project’. The projects are intended to facilitate innovation within industry without compromising safety, by making it simpler and more efficient to design, manufacture, test, certify and operate trusted autonomous systems. Collaboration and an inter-disciplinary team, together with deep regulatory knowledge and strong stakeholder relationships will facilitate tangible results. This is a ‘common good’ activity, but will also bring commercial benefit, for example through increased business for Queensland test ranges and the creation of jobs. It is expected that this innovative project will have real impact over the next 24 months and beyond, and will result in a more efficient, faster assurance and accreditation process, without compromising safety.
This paper is presented in four parts: (1) Introduction, (2) Background, (3) Regulating Autonomous Systems, and (4) Conclusion. The Background includes a brief history, together with an overview of the key terms and use cases for each of the maritime, air and land domains. The Regulating Autonomous Systems section includes sub-sections on trust, regulatory philosophy, systems safety, and assurance and accreditation in Australia. The Conclusion reflects on the key messages presented in the paper, and points to the next steps. The paper is intended to consolidate cross-domain information on the uses of autonomous systems in Australia, provide thought leadership on the regulation of trusted autonomous systems, and provide an example of the Queensland Government’s approach to addressing these complex issues.
Autonomous systems are becoming more prevalent in Australia, particularly as the safety, environmental and efficiency benefits become better understood, and the increasing sophistication of technology improves capability and availability. Increasing use of these systems, particularly in the maritime and air domain, is placing pressure on the national safety regulators, who must either continue to apply their traditional regulatory approach or seize the opportunity to put in place a more agile and adaptive approach better suited to the rapid developments of the 21st century.
Two of the primary drivers for use of autonomous systems in the maritime domain are the efficiency and cost-saving benefits that can be realised. For example, in the hydrographic survey industry, opportunities were identified early on to save a significant portion of fuel budgets by using small autonomous vessels to conduct the majority of surveying work. This economic incentive, which extends from fuel savings into the opportunity for concurrent operations without additional crew costs, and longer operation times, has driven the development of increasingly sophisticated autonomous vessels. In addition to economic incentives, autonomous systems have the capacity to remove humans from dangerous work circumstances and can reduce the environmental impact of commercial activities.
In Australia, land-based autonomous systems are widespread, and use cases include diverse areas such as mining, which includes heavy mining equipment and smaller topological survey robots, agriculture, which includes heavy and light equipment and small-scale agricultural robots known as agribots. Emergency services incorporate search and rescue UGVs and legged robotics, as well as bomb disposal and firefighting drones. Heavy and light automated rail and some areas of road transport such as Connected Intelligent Transport Systems (CITS) may also be automated. Defence incorporates various types of automation such as radar and automated Close-In Weapons Systems (CIWS) and mobile automated platforms such as weapon carrying UGVs, or recovery vehicles and APCs. Other land-based autonomous systems include bio-mimetic systems, platform agnostic systems, and autonomous systems that are without physical instantiation such as Diagnostic AI, Legal Automation, µZero and other similar automated ML programs.
Autonomous systems are becoming more widely accepted as they have the potential to be more economical than traditional systems, and can remove humans from dirty, dangerous, or dull jobs, and in some areas – such as mining and manufacturing – are replacing humans altogether. The future landscape of autonomy will see industry, infrastructure, and society designed around autonomous systems rather than being added to or integrated subsequently and will likely be unrecognisable to people of today.[24] As the internet of things approaches autonomous systems in our everyday lives will become ubiquitous.
regulated, industry and broader community. How trust is conceptualised, and how relevant considerations are included in regulatory frameworks, will change as increasing levels of autonomy are introduced.
Traditional technology is generally deemed safe if it complies with the regulatory framework set down and enforced by the Government or applicable regulator. For example, the public would be entitled to assume a commercial vessel is safe if it has met the survey, operational, and competency-based requirements imposed by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority. Trust is also supported by history of successful use – i.e., if a technology has been in use for one hundred years, there is a good understanding of the risks of failure and the results. Familiarity is another component of trust- if a technology has widespread usage and is visible in the media, trust will be engendered. A further component is trust by association – if an entity or person that is trusted uses or promotes use of a new technology, that can also engender trust.
Autonomous technology must be deemed safe in order to be accepted by prospective users, Government, the applicable regulator, and the public. This would be a simpler proposition if the Government or applicable regulator were experts in autonomous technology and had crafted well-tailored assurance and accreditation requirements, but that is rarely the case. The speed of technology development in the autonomous systems industry means that, early on, the only experts are the developers of the technology itself, and then the industry which is using it. In these circumstances industry-led projects to develop codes of practice or other regulatory content are vital, as they provide a baseline level of requirement to ensure safety among early- adopters, provide the Government or applicable regulator with a starting point for learning about the technology and then developing an appropriate regulatory approach, and they provide a level of confidence for members of the public.
An example of an industry-led collaboration is the Maritime UK Autonomous Systems Regulatory Working Group (MASRWG), which published a Code of Practice for Maritime Autonomous Ships in November 2017, and have provided an updated version each 12 months.[30] This Code provides a baseline set of requirements covering key issues such as design and manufacture, operation, skills and training, ship systems, cyber security, pilotage, and data recording.[31] While the Code is not a formal part of the UK maritime regulatory framework, it is used by industry as the accepted standard for autonomous vessels, and reflects current best practice.
A challenge for the Government or applicable regulator is to properly balance risk with regulatory overlay. If there is insufficient regulatory overlay to meet the risk of the operation, it will jeopardise trust in the technology and its regulation, but if the regulatory overlay is too heavy, it can stifle innovation and jeopardise trust in the intentions of the regulator. For this reason, adopting an appropriate regulatory approach is critical to ensuring innovation is supported, the benefits of autonomous systems are realised, and trust is maintained between all stakeholders involved.
The concept of anticipatory regulation features these characteristics: inclusive and collaborative; future facing; proactive; iterative; outcomes based; and experimental at the forefront.[32] A key feature of anticipatory regulation is a focus on “co-design”, where the regulator and industry work together to co-design standards and regulation that are fit for purpose and achieve the required outcomes. This approach focusses on the system and how to influence it. It introduces the concept of regulatory stewardship, whereby regulation is seen as an asset that helps things happen effectively.
in, than was in place pre-disruption. Is it the case that regulators should draw back regulation a notch, and let market forces provide the level of safety consumers demand? In answering these core questions, we may find that a shift in regulatory philosophy is necessary.
We argue that Australia’s regulatory approach must be reshaped to one that is agile, adaptive and anticipatory, and therefore capable of supporting fast updates of new technology, fast prototyping, and a paired back time to get new products to market. If Australian regulators could work towards becoming adaptive regulators, it would dramatically improve their ability to keep pace with technological change. The rise in popularity of human-centered design and the implementation of co-regulation are steps towards agile and anticipatory regulation, and will see Australia’s ability to regulate emerging technology such as autonomous systems continue to increase.
There is a strong focus on System Safety and SMS as a way to ensure safety in both the maritime and air domains. For example, within the maritime regulatory framework, a SMS is required in order to satisfy General Safety Duties and operational requirements. In the aviation context, system safety is a design requirement for all type certified aircraft to ensure that the aircraft system is both reliable and resilient during operation. Safety Management Systems are required to be implemented by various approval holders in aviation in accordance with ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs). This focus on Systems Safety and SMS will be an essential component in the successful assurance and accreditation of autonomous systems into the future.
In Australia there is a lack of established assurance frameworks to integrate autonomous systems into traditional systems, which means neither industry, testing facilities, nor regulators, have clear or consistent expectations or understanding of what assurance activities are required to demonstrate compliance with requirements to indicate safe operations. This is inefficient and compromises trust, which makes it a priority to address.
Accreditation typically relies on demonstrating compliance with regulatory requirements, including standards or defined codes of practice. However, when it comes to systems with autonomous capability, there are no tailored standards or codes of practice that relate to autonomy. In the air domain CASA uses a risk- based approach to approvals, which take into account the differences between autonomous aircraft and traditional aircraft. In the maritime domain, autonomous systems are subject to the same regulatory framework as traditional craft. This means autonomous operations generally rely on exemptions in order to operate, which take a long period of time to process and approve. There is often a lack of sufficiently sophisticated understanding of these autonomous systems, their capabilities and risks within the third-party surveying and inspection industry, and within regulators, which further slows down the accreditation process.
This lack of established standards or codes of practice for autonomous systems, and lack of sophisticated understanding within the surveying and inspection industry, and within regulators, represents a lost opportunity for the Australian economy to efficiently gain the economic benefit of new technology and to enable local industry to design, test and commercialise novel autonomous systems.
Regulation of UAS operations in Australia is therefore treated using a proportionate, risk-based framework [51] through Part 101 of the Civil Aviation Safety Regulations 1998 (CASR). Operations outside of standard operating conditions (within visual line of sight, not over people, not near an aerodrome or above 400ft AGL) require multiple approvals for the various exceedances to the standard operating conditions.
Whilst CASA requirements are outcome based and therefore flexible and adaptable, there is currently a lack of direct guidance, processes or standards, particularly with respect to the design and demonstration of compliance with high level safety objectives for the highly automated or autonomous aspects of UAS. It is unlikely that regulators will have the capacity or expertise to detail specific standards or methods to design, test and build highly automated or autonomous systems. This will require a more collaborative approach with industry and academia, leveraging the capacity and expertise of industry.
Land domain The diverse applications of land-based autonomous systems fall under multiple regulatory areas. Each of the major areas where land-based autonomous systems operate have regulations specific to them, or some international safety standard that may apply. For example, land transport falls under the Australian Vehicle Standards Rules 1999 (Cth)[53] and the National Transport Commission (Road Transport Legislation— Vehicle Standards) Regulations 2006 (Cth)[54], and is based around the Australian Design Rules (ADR).[55] It is regulated in each jurisdiction with the assistance of peak advisory bodies such as Austroads and the National Transport Commission (NTC), which work to improve the regulatory process. Heavy vehicles are regulated separately under the Heavy Vehicle (Vehicle Standards) National Regulation.[56] Rail in Australia is administered by the Office of the National Rail Safety Regulator (ONRSR)[57] and each state and territory have legislation that mirrors ONRSR.[58] Agriculture, having no specific federal regulatory structure, is regulated in each state or territory under workplace health and safety regimes based around the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 (Cth)[59] (WH&S), which have mirror legislation in each jurisdiction.
guidelines and safety standards,[61] applied by industry under an overarching safety framework based around WH&S principles that set workplace health and safety standards applicable to all mining. Emergency and disaster response services (EDS) are regulated separately in each state and territory under various regimes specific to the emergency response, such as fire,[62] police,[63] and ambulance,[64] – and as no specific autonomous technology regulations currently exist, these systems will likely fall under the broader remit of WH&S applicable to all branches of EDS.[65] Accordingly, where no controlling regulatory body at either the Commonwealth, state and territory level exists, the use of autonomous systems and technology will fall under the broad safety management requirements provided by the WH&S regimes in each jurisdiction. Where no assurance pathway for autonomous systems exists, there is a good case for developing a WH&S principle- based assurance pathway.
There is a critical role to be played by third parties from industry, government, and academia who can work together to develop, test and publish a new assurance and accreditation framework for trusted autonomous systems, and provide recommendations for areas the regulators should focus on to ensure the benefits of autonomous systems can be realized, without compromising safety. This will address the cyclical problem that the development of improved technical standards is dependent on end user demand, but end user demand is dependent on the certainty that comes from having established standards and requirements in place.
In order to facilitate development and commercial operationalisation of autonomous systems, in some jurisdictions industry groups have collaborated to create guidelines and codes of practice, such as the Maritime Autonomous Surface Ships Industry Conduct Principles & Code of Practice [66] mentioned earlier. These documents, while not officially endorsed, provide industry and regulators with guidance on the minimum expectations for the build and safe operation of autonomous systems.
There are opportunities for third party collaborations in Australia, such as the Assurance of Autonomy Activity mentioned above, as well as the Australian Association for Unmanned System’s new Maritime Working Group [70], to improve the assurance and accreditation approach for autonomous systems, and accelerate an improved regulatory approach which will facilitate innovation without compromising safety.
Australia is seeing a rapidly expanding market for autonomous systems in the maritime, air, and land domains, due to fast paced technological development, increasing availability and capability, and the safety, environmental and efficiency benefits they offer. We recommend a more agile, adaptive and anticipatory regulatory philosophy be implemented by regulators, with a focus on co-design, co-regulation, and trust, to ensure innovation is facilitated and the benefits of autonomous systems can be fully realized. Where Government and regulators are unable to lead innovation in an assurance and accreditation context, third party collaborations can address the gap and ensure progress is not stifled. The opportunities presented by rapidly developing autonomous systems technology will not be fully realized until an anticipatory regulatory philosophy is implemented, and an appropriately tailored assurance and accreditation framework is available for operators and regulators. Where these frameworks accurately reflect the community’s expectations of Government and regulators, are appropriately tailored for application to autonomous systems, including balancing the regulatory overlay with the risk presented, trust will be engendered, and innovation accelerated.
The research for this paper received funding support from the Queensland Government through Trusted Autonomous Systems (TAS), a Defence Cooperative Research Centre funded through the Commonwealth Next Generation Technologies Fund and the Queensland Government.