Generated using the official AMS LATEX template v6.1 two-column layout. This work has been submitted for publication. This Work has not yet been peer-reviewed and is provided by the contributing Author(s) as a means to ensure timely dissemination of scholarly and technical work on a noncommercial basis. Copyright and all rights therein are maintained by the Author(s) or by other copyright owners. Copyright in this work may be transferred without further notice, and this version may no longer be accessible.
ABSTRACT: In Australia, hailstorms present considerable public safety and economic risks, where they are considered the most damaging natural hazard in terms of annual insured losses. Despite these impacts, the current climatological distribution of hailfall across the continent is still comparatively poorly understood. This study aims to supplement previous national hail climatologies, such as those based on environmental proxies or satellite radiometer data, with more direct radar-based hail observations. The heterogeneous and incomplete nature of the Australian radar network complicates this task and prompts the introduction of some novel methodological elements. We introduce an empirical correction technique to account for hail reflectivity biases at C-band, derived by comparing overlapping C- and S-band observations. Furthermore, we demonstrate how object-based hail swath analysis may be used to produce resolution-invariant hail frequencies, and describe an interpolation method used to create a spatially continuous hail climatology. The Maximum Estimated Size of Hail (MESH) parameter is then applied to a mixture of over fifty operational radars in the Australian radar archive, resulting in the first nationwide, radar-based hail climatology. The spatiotemporal distribution of hailstorms is examined, including their physical characteristics, seasonal and diurnal frequency, and regional variations of such properties across the continent.
Hailstorms account for a substantial portion of financial impacts caused by natural hazards globally, resulting in greater than 10 billion USD in insured losses annually in the United States alone (Gunturi and Tippett 2017). In Aus- tralia, hail is typically considered the most costly natural hazard in terms of insured losses, exceeding the combined losses of both bushfires and floods (Schuster et al. 2006; McAneney et al. 2019). Several of the country’s most populous cities have experienced hailstorms that resulted in over 1 billion AUD in losses, including Melbourne in the south (Buckley et al. 2010; Allen 2012), Perth on the west coast (Buckley et al. 2010), and most frequently Bris- bane and Sydney on the east coast (Soderholm et al. 2019; Schuster et al. 2006). Financial losses also appear to be increasing alongside an expansion of the built environment (Changnon et al. 2009), and as of 2019 in Australia, seven of the ten most damaging events occurred in the past decade (adjusted for inflation, Eichner 2019). The significance of these financial impacts underscores the need to quantify the current level of hail hazard in the region.
Sousounis 2012; Allen and Karoly 2014; Prein and Hol- land 2018). Recent research by Raupach et al. (2023) addresses these concerns in an Australian context by train- ing their proxy on Australian hail reports, and allowing their formulation to vary latitudinally, which more accu- rately characterized hail environments across the country. However, the accuracy of this approach is limited by the representativeness of the underlying hail report data set, which is affected by the aforementioned biases involving population density and reporting practices. Moreover, hail proxies are known to suffer from the “initiation problem”, whereby only a small fraction of hail-prone environments (often less than 10%, Taszarek et al. 2020) actually un- dergo convective initiation (Tippett et al. 2015). This issue ultimately leads to large uncertainties regarding the true cli- matological frequency of hailfall. In an Australian context, this problem spuriously highlights a spatial hail frequency maximum over the ocean on the east coast (e.g., Prein and Holland 2018). These oceanic overestimations likely stem from an absence of known convection trigger mechanisms for the region, such as sea-breeze or topographic inter- actions (Soderholm et al. 2017b). Raupach et al. (2023) demonstrated that incorporating a series of additional en- vironmental constraints could successfully reduce the false alarm rate for Australian hailstorms, improving the Crit- ical Success Index (CSI) to ∼0.3 when compared to hail reports.