We analyze the data on personal income distribution from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. We compare ﬁts of the data to the exponential, log-normal, and gamma distributions. The exponential function gives a good (albeit not perfect) description of 98% of the population in the lower part of the distribution. The log-normal and gamma functions do not improve the ﬁt signiﬁcantly, despite having more param- eters, and mimic the exponential function. We ﬁnd that the probability density at zero income is not zero, which contradicts the log-normal and gamma distributions, but is consistent with the exponential one. The high-resolution histogram of the probability density shows a very sharp and narrow peak at low incomes, which we interpret as the result of a government policy on income redistribution.
distribution [4,5,6]. Yakovenko and Dr˘agulescu [7] proposed that the distri- bution of individual income should follow the exponential law analogous to the Boltzmann-Gibbs distribution of energy in statistical physics. They found substantial evidence for this in the statistical data for USA [8,9,10,11]. Also widely used is the gamma distribution, which diﬀers from the exponential one by a power-law prefactor [12,13,14]. For a recent collection of papers discussing these distributions, see the book [15].
The exponential distribution has one parameter T , and its P (x) is maximal at x = 0. The log-normal and gamma distributions have two parameters each: (m, s) and (β, α). They have maxima (called modes in mathematical statistics) s2 and x = αβ, and their P (x) vanish at x = 0. Many researchers at x = m e− impose the condition P (0) = 0 a priori, “because people cannot live on zero income”. However, this assumption must be checked against the real data.
In this paper, we analyze statistical data on personal income distribution in Australia for 1989–2000 and compare them with the three functions in Eq. (1). The data were collected by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) using surveys of population. The anonymous data sets give annual incomes of about 14,000 representative individuals, and each individual is assigned a weight. The weights add up to 1.3÷1.5×107 in the considered period, which is comparable to the current population of Australia of about 20 million people. In the data analysis, we exclude individuals with negative and zero income, whose total weight is about 7%. These ABS data were studied in the previous paper [4], but without weights and with the emphasis on the Pareto tail at high income. Here we re-analyze the data in the middle and low income range covering about 99% of the population, but excluding the Pareto tail. The number of data points in the Pareto tail is relatively small in surveys of population, which complicates accurate analysis of the tail.
z dz. To visualize C(x), diﬀerent scales can be used. Fig. 1(a) uses the log-linear scale, i.e. shows the plot of ln C vs. x. The main panel in Fig. 1(b) uses the linear-linear scale, and the inset the log-log scale, i.e. ln C vs. ln x. We observe that the log-linear scale is the most informative, because the data points ap- proximately fall on a straight line for two orders of magnitudes, which suggests the exponential distribution. To obtain the best ﬁt in the log-linear scale, we minimize the relative mean square deviation σ2 = 1 ≈ M 1 i=1{ln[Ce(xi)] − ln[Ct(xi)]}2 between the empirical Ce(x) and theoretical M P Ct(x) CDFs. For this sum, we select M = 200 income values xi uniformly spaced between x = 0 and the income at which CDF is equal to 1%, i.e. we ﬁt the distribution for 99% of the population. The minimization procedure was implemented numerically in Matlab using the standard routines.
Fig. 1. The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of income, shown in the log-linear (a), linear-linear (b), and log-log (inset) scales. The income values for diﬀerent years are normalized to the parameter T of the exponential distribution, given in Table 1. The lines show ﬁts to diﬀerent theoretical distributions in Eq. (2).
Table 1 Parameters of the distributions (1) and (2) obtained by minimization of the relative mean square deviation σ2 between the empirical and theoretical CDFs. The last column gives position of the sharp peak in Fig. 2(b).
In order to construct P (x), we divide the income axis into bins of the width ∆x, calculate the sum of the weights wn of the individuals with incomes from x to x+∆x, and plot the obtained histogram. However, there is subjectiveness in the choice of the width ∆x of the bins. If the bins are too wide, the number of individuals in each bin is big, so the statistics is good, but ﬁne details of the PDF are lost. If the bins are too narrow, the number of individuals in each bin is small, thus relative ﬂuctuations are big, so the histogram of PDF becomes noisy. Eﬀectively, P (x) is a derivative of the empirical C(x). However, numer- ical diﬀerentiation increases noise and magniﬁes minor irregularities of C(x), which are not necessarily important when we are interested in the universal features of income distribution. To illustrate these problems, we show PDFs obtained with two diﬀerent bin widths in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2(a) shows the coarse-grained histogram of P (x) for all years with a wide bin width ∆x/T ≈ 0.43. The horizontal axis represents income x rescaled with the values of T from Table 1. The lines show the exponential, log-normal, and gamma ﬁts with the same parameters as in Fig. 1. With this choice of the bin width, the empirical P (x) is a monotonous function of x with the maximum at x = 0, and the exponential function gives a reasonable overall ﬁt. The log- normal and gamma ﬁts have maxima at x/T ≈ 0.56 and x/T ≈ 0.29. These values are close to the bin width, so we cannot resolve whether P (x) has a maximum at x = 0 or at a non-zero x within the ﬁrst bin.
Fig. 2. The probability density function (PDF) of income distribution shown with coarse-grained (a) and high (b) resolutions. The lines show ﬁts to diﬀerent theoret- ical functions in Eq. (1).
peak occurs at the threshold income of some sort of government policy, such as social welfare, minimal wage, or tax exemption. Comparing the empirical PDF with the exponential curve, shown by the solid line, we infer that the probability density above and below the peak is transferred to the peak, thus creating anomalously high population at the special income.
We also studied how often diﬀerent income values occur in the data sets. The most frequently reported incomes for diﬀerent years are always round numbers, such as 15 k$, 20 k$, 25 k$, etc. This eﬀect can be seen in the periodically spaced spikes in Fig. 2(b). It reﬂects either the design of the survey questionnaires, or the habit of people for rounding their incomes in reporting. In addition to the round numbers, we also ﬁnd the income corresponding to the peak position among the ﬁve most frequently reported incomes. This income, shown in the last column in Table 1, is not round and changes from year to year, but sometimes stays the same. This again suggests that the sharp peak in Fig. 2(b) is the result of a government-imposed policy and cannot be explained by statistical physics arguments.
By deﬁnition, P (x) is the slope of C(x) with the opposite sign. Fig. 1 clearly shows that the slope of C(x) at x = 0 is not zero, so P (x = 0) 6= 0. Fig. 2(b) also shows that the probability density at zero income is not zero. In fact, P (x = 0) is higher than P (x) for all other x, except in the narrow peak. The non-vanishing P (x = 0) is a strong evidence against the log-normal, gamma, and similar distributions, but is qualitatively consistent with the exponential function. However, there is also substantial population with zero and negative income, which is not described by any of these theories.
All three functions in Eq. (1) are the limiting cases of the generalized beta distribution of the second kind (GB2), which is also discussed in econometric literature on income distribution [16]. GB2 has four ﬁtting parameters, and distributions with even more ﬁtting parameters are considered in literature [16]. Generally, functions with more parameters are expected ﬁt the data bet- ter. However, we do not think that increasing the number of free parameters gives a better insight into the problem. We think that a useful description of the data is the one that has the minimal number of parameters, yet reasonably (but not necessarily perfectly) agrees with the data. From this point of view, the exponential function has the advantage of having only one parameter T over the log-normal, gamma, and other distributions with more parameters. Fig. 1(a) shows that log C vs. x is approximately a straight line for about 98% of population, although small systematic deviations do exist. The log- normal and gamma distributions do not improve the ﬁt signiﬁcantly, despite having more parameters, and actually mimic the exponential function. Thus we conclude that the exponential function is the best choice.
clearly not zero, which contradicts the log-normal and gamma distributions, but is consistent with the exponential one, although the value of P (x = 0) is somewhat lower than expected. The coarse-grained P (x) is monotonous and consistent with the exponential distribution. The high resolution PDF shows a very sharp and narrow peak at low incomes, which, we believe, results from redistribution of probability density near the income threshold of a govern- ment policy. Technically, none of the three function in Eq. (1) can ﬁt the complicated, three-peak PDF shown in Fig. 2. However, statistical physics approaches are intended to capture only the baseline of the distribution, not its ﬁne features. Moreover, the deviation of the actual PDF from the theoret- ical exponential curve can be taken as a measure of the impact of government policies on income redistribution.
Acknowledgments. T. Di Matteo wishes to thank the Australian Social Science Data Archive, ANU, for providing the ABS data and the partial sup- port by ARC Discovery Projects: DP03440044 (2003) and DP0558183 (2005), COST P10 ‘Physics of Risk’ project and M.I.U.R.-F.I.S.R. Project ‘Ultra-high frequency dynamics of ﬁnancial markets’.
cond-mat/0406694.
B. K. Chakrabarti, Springer, 2005.